

 
Longman 
Essential Idioms 
in English
Robert J. Dixson

 
visit Obama-OMama.blogspot.com 
for more eBooks and materials

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
FOREWORD 
 
Idiomatic expressions have long played an important role in the English 
language. In fact, the use of idioms is so widespread that an understanding of 
these expressions is essential to successful communication, whether in 
listening, speaking, reading, or writing. 
 
The student may learn grammar and, with time, acquire adequate vocabulary, 
but without a working knowledge of such idioms as above all, to get along, on 
the whole, to look up, etc., even the best student's speech will remain awkward 
and ordinary. 
 
Of course, the idioms selected for study should have practical value and be 
within the student's ability to comprehend. Such expressions as to set the 
world on fire or to wash one's dirty laundry in public may be very colorful, 
but they do little to help the student achieve fluency in English. 
 
Teachers of English have long recognized that idiomatic expressions add grace 
and exactness to the language. The alert teacher will make their study an 
integral part of the teaching process. However, learning such expressions is 
never an easy task for the student learning English as a second or foreign 
language. Attempts to translate literally from the student's native tongue 
usually lead to roundabout expression of meaning and, more often, to 
confusion. 
 
For this reason, only basic idioms have been included in this book, 
appropriately named Essential Idioms in English, New Edition. Furthermore, 
it was decided not to burden the student with discussion of the origins of 
idioms. There is no need to define the exact nature of an idiom except to 
assume that it is a phrase that has a meaning different from the meanings of 
its individual parts. This helps to explain why it is often difficult to translate 
an idiom from one language to another without incurring some change in 
meaning or usage. 
 
For the purposes of this book, two-word verbs are included in the general 
category of idioms. A two-word verb is a verb whose meaning is altered by he 
addition of a particle (a preposition used with a verb to form an idiomatic 
expression.) to look, for example, may become to look up or to look over, each 
having its own special meaning. When a two-word verb can be separated by a 
noun or pronoun, the symbol (S) for separable is inserted in the definition. 
Sentences illustrating both separable and nonseparable forms are included in 
the examples. 
 
Experienced ESL and EFL teachers will agree, for the most part, with the 
selection of idioms in this text. However, it should be recognized that any 
selection is somewhat arbitrary because the range is so great. Some teachers 
might prefer to omit certain idioms and to add others not included, but all 
should appreciate the attempt to make Essential idioms in English, New 
Edition as representative as possible. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 1 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
Mention should be made of a unique feature that adds to the usefulness of this 
book: Appendix II is a listing of the idioms in the text with their equivalents in 
Spanish, French, and German. Having these equivalents should give the 
student a surer grasp of the meaning of the English idioms and greater 
confidence in using them. 
 
This fourth revision of Essential Idioms in English, New Edition has 
undergone several important changes. The text has been restored to the 
original three-section format: Elementary (lessons 1-13), Intermediate (lesion 
14-27), and Advanced (lessons 28-39). As would be expected, new idioms have 
been included and outdated idioms have been removed. Lessons in all sections 
review and build upon idioms introduced in earlier lessons. In some cases, 
notes that explain special usage or meaning are provided after the definitions, 
and related idiomatic forms are listed. New types of exercises provide greater 
variety in activity from one section to another. Finally, there is an answer key 
in the back of the book for all multiple-choice, matching, true-false, and fill-
in-the-blank exercises. 
 
SECTION ONE --- ELEMENTARY 
 
LESSON 1 
 
to get in/to get on: to enter or to board a vehicle 
To get in is used for cars; to get on is used for all other forms of transportation. 
o It's easiest to get in the car from the driver's side. The door on the other 
side doesn't work well. 
o I always get on the bus to work at 34
th
 Street. 
 
to get out of/to get off: to leave or to descend from a vehicle. 
To get out of is used for cars; to get off is used for all other forms of 
transportation. 
o Why don't we stop and get out of the car for a while? 
o Helen got off the train at the 42
nd
 Street terminal. 
 
to put on: to place on oneself (usually said of clothes) (S) 
o Mary put on her coat and left the room. 
o Put your hat on before you leave the house. 
 
to take off: to remove (usually said of clothes) (S) 
o John took off his jacket as he entered the office. 
o Take your sweater off. The room is very warm. 
 
to call up: to telephone (also: to give some one a call) (S) 
To call can be used instead of to call up, as in the first example below. 
o I forgot to call up Mr. Jones yesterday. I'd better call him now. 
o Call me up tomorrow, Jane. We'll arrange a time to have lunch together. 
o I promise to give you a call as soon as I arrive in New York. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 2 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to turn on: to start or cause to function (also: to switch on) (S) 
o Please turn on the light; it's too dark in here. 
o Do you know who turned the air conditioning on? 
to turn off: to cause to stop functioning (also: to switch off, to shut off) (S) 
Turn on and turn off, as well as their related forms, are used for things that 
flow, such as electricity, water, gas, etc. 
o Please turn off the light when you leave the room. 
o Are you really listening to the radio, or should I turn it off? 
 
right away: very soon; immediately (also: at once) 
o Dad says that dinner will be ready right away, so we'd better wash our 
hands and set the table. 
o Tell Will to come to my office right away. I must see him immediately. 
o Stop playing that loud music at once! 
 
to pick up: to lift form the floor, table, etc., with one's fingers (S) 
o Harry picked up the newspaper that was on the front doorstep. 
o Could you pick your toy up before someone falls over it? 
 
sooner or later: eventually, after a period of time 
o If you study English seriously, sooner or later you'll become fluent. 
o I'm too tired to do my homework now; I'm sure I'll do it sooner or later. 
 
to get up: to arise, to rise from a bed; to make someone arise (S) 
For the last definition a noun phrase must separate the verb and particle. 
o Carla gets up at seven o'clock every morning. 
o At what time should we get the children up tomorrow? 
 
at first: in the beginning, originally 
o At first English was difficult for him, but later he made great progress. 
o I thought at first that it was Sheila calling, but then I realized that it 
was Betty. 
 
LESSON 2 
 
to dress up: to wear formal clothes, to dress very nicely 
o We should definitely dress up to go to the theater. 
o You don't have to dress up for Mike's party. 
 
at last: finally, after a long time. 
o We waited for hours and then the train arrived at last. 
o Now that I am sixteen, at last I can drive my parents' car. 
 
as usual: as is the general case, as is typical 
o George is late for class as usual. This seems to happen every day. 
o As usual, Dora received first prize in the swimming contest. It's the 
third consecutive year that she has won. 
 
to find out: get information about, to determine (S) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 3 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
This idiom is separable only when a pronoun is used, as in the second example. 
o Will you please try to find out what time the airplane arrives? 
o I'll call right now to find it out. 
 
to look at: give one's attention to; to watch 
o The teacher told us to look at the blackboard and not at our books. 
o I like to walk along a country road at night and look at the stars. 
 
to look for: to try to find, to search for 
An adverb phrase such as all over can be put between the verb and 
preposition, as in the second example, however, the idiom cannot be 
separated by a noun or pronoun. 
o He's spent over an hour looking for the pen that he lost. 
o So there you are! We've looked allover for you. 
 
all right: acceptable, fine; yes, okay 
This idiom can also be spelled alright in informal usage. 
o He said that it would be all right to wait in her office until she returned. 
o Do you want me to turn off the TV? Alright, if you insist. 
all along: all the time, from the beginning (without change) 
o She knew all along that we'd never agree with his plan. 
o You're smiling! Did you know all along that I'd give you a birthday 
present? 
 
little by little: gradually, slowly (also: step by step) 
o Karen's health seems to be improving little by little. 
o If you study regularly each day, step by step your vocabulary will 
increase. 
 
to  tire  out: 
to make very weary due to difficult conditions or hard effort (also: 
to wear out) (S) 
o The hot weather tired out the runners in the marathon. 
o Does studying for final exams wear you out? It makes me feel worn out! 
 
to call on: to ask for a response from; to visit (also: to drop in on) 
o Jose didn't know the answer when the teacher called on him. 
o Last night several friends called on us at our home. 
o Shy don't we drop in on Sally a little later? 
 
never mind: don't be concerned about it; ignore what was just said 
o When he spilled his drink on my coat, I said, "Never mind. It needs to 
be cleaned anyway." 
o So you weren't listening to me again. Never mind; it wasn't important. 
 
LESSON 3 
 
to pick out: to choose, to select (S) 
o Ann picked out a good book to give to her brother as a graduation gift. 
o Johnny, if you want me to buy you a toy, then pick one out now. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 4 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to take one's time: to do without rush, not to hurry 
This idiom is often used in the imperative form. (See the first example) 
o There's no need to hurry doing those exercises. Take your time. 
o William never works rapidly. He always takes his time in every thing 
that he does. 
 
to talk over: to discuss or consider a situation with others (S) 
o We talked over Carla's plan to install an air conditioner in the room, 
but we couldn't reach a decision. 
o Before I accepted the new job offer, I talked the matter over with my 
life. 
 
to life down: to place oneself in a flat position, to recline 
o If you are tired, why don't you lie down for an hour or so? 
o The doctor says that Grace must lie down and rest for a short time 
every afternoon. 
 
to stand up: to rise from a sitting or lying position (also: to get up) 
o When the president entered the room, everyone stood up. 
o Suzy, stop rolling around on the floor; get up now. 
 
to sit down: to be seated (also: take a seat) 
o We sat down on the park bench and watched the children play. 
o There aren't any more chairs, but you can take a seat on the floor. 
 
all (day, week, month, year) long: the entire day, week, month, year 
o I've been working on my income tax forms all day long. I've hardly had 
time to eat. 
o It's been raining 
all week long. We haven't seen the sun since last 
Monday. 
 
by oneself: alone, without assistance 
o Francis translated that French novel by himself. No one helped him. 
o Paula likes to walk through the woods by herself, but her brother 
prefers to walk with a companion. 
 
on purpose: for a reason, deliberately 
This idiom is usually used when someone does something wrong or unfair. 
o Do you think that she didn't come to the meeting on purpose? 
o It was no accident that he broke my glasses. He did it on purpose. 
 
to get along with: to associate or work well with; to succeed or manage in 
doing (also: to get on with) 
o Terry isn't getting along with her new roommate; they argue 
constantly. 
o How are you getting on with your students? 
 
to make a difference (to): to be of importance (to), to affect 
This idiom is often used with adjectives to show the degree of importance. 
o It makes a big difference to me whether he likes the food I serve. 
o Does it make any difference to you where we go for dinner? 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 5 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o No, it doesn't make any difference. 
o It makes no difference to Lisa either. 
 
to take out: to remove, to extract (S); to go on a date with (S) (also to go 
out with) 
o Student, take out your books and open them to page twelve. 
o Did you take Sue out last night? 
o No, she couldn't go out with me. 
 
LESSON 4 
 
to take part in: to be involved in, to participate in (also: to be in on) 
o Martin was sick and could not take part in the meeting yesterday. 
o I didn't want to be in on their argument, so I remained silent. 
 
at all: to any degree (also: in the least) 
o Larry isn't at all shy about expressing his opinions. 
o When I asked Donna whether she was tired, she said, "Not in the least. 
I'm full of energy." 
 
to look up: to locate information in a directory, dictionary, book, etc. (S) 
o Ellen suggested that we look up Lee's telephone number in the 
directory. 
o Students should try to understand the meaning of a new word from 
context before looking the word up in the dictionary. 
 
to wait on: to serve in a store or restaurant 
o A very pleasant young clerk waited on me in that shop. 
o The restaurant waitress asked us, "Has anyone waited on you yet? 
 
at least: a minimum of, no fewer (or less) than 
o I spend at least two hours every night on my studies. 
o Mike claims that he drinks at least a quart of water every day. 
 
so far: until now, until the present time (also: up to now, as of yet) 
This idiom is usually used with the present perfect tense. 
o So far, this year has been excellent for business. I hope that the good 
luck continues. 
o How many idioms have we studied in this book up to now? 
o As of yet, we have not had an answer from him. 
 
to take a walk, stroll, hike
, etc.: to go for a walk, stroll, hike, etc. 
A stroll involves slow, easy walking; a hike involves serious, strenuous walking. 
o Last evening we took a walk around the park. 
o It's a fine day. Would you like to take a stroll along Mason Boulevard? 
o Let's take a hike up Cowles Mountain this afternoon. 
 
to take a trip: to go on a journey, to travel 
o I'm so busy at work that I have no time to take a trip. 
o During the summer holidays, the Thompsons took a trip to Europe. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 6 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to try on: to wear clothes to check the style or fit before buying (S) 
o He tried on several suits before he picked out a blue one. 
o Why don't you try these shoes on next? 
 
to think over: to consider carefully before deciding (S) 
o I'd like to think over your offer first. Then can we talk it over tomorrow? 
o You don't have to give me your decision now. Think it over for a while. 
 
to take place: to occur, to happen according to plan 
o The regular meetings of the committee take place in Constitution Hall. 
o I thought that the celebration was taking place at John's house. 
 
to put away: to remove from slight, to put in the proper place (S) 
o Please put away your papers before you open the test booklet. 
o John put the notepad away in his desk when he was finished with it. 
 
LESSON 5 
 
to look out: to be careful or cautious (also: to watch out) 
Both of these idioms can occur with the preposition for. 
o "Look out!" Jeffrey cried as his friend almost stepped in a big hole in 
the ground. 
o Look out for reckless drivers whenever you cross the street. 
o Small children should always watch out for strangers offering candy. 
 
to shake hands: to exchange greetings by clasping hands 
o When people meet for the first time, they usually shake hands. 
o The student warmly shook hands with his old professor. 
 
to get back: to return (S) 
o Mr. Harris got back from his business trip to Chicago this morning. 
o Could you get the children back home by five o'clock? 
 
to catch cold: to become sick with a cold of the nose for throat 
o If you go out in this rain, you will surely catch cold. 
o How did she ever catch cold in such warm weather? 
 
to get over: to recover from an illness; to accept a loss or sorrow 
o It took me over a month to get over my cold, but I'm finally well now. 
o It seems that Mr. Mason will never get over the death of his wife. 
 
to make up one's mind: to reach a decision, to decide finally 
o Sally is considering several colleges to attend, but she hasn't made up 
her mind yet. 
o When are you going to make up your mind about your vacation plans? 
 
to change one's mind: to alter one's decision or opinion 
o We have changed our minds and are going to Canada instead of 
California this summer. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 7 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Matthew has changed his mind several times about buying a new cat. 
 
for the time being: temporarily (also: for now) 
o For the time being, Janet is working as a waitress, but she really hopes 
to become an actress soon. 
o We're living in an apartment for now, but soon we'll be looking for a 
house to buy. 
for good: permanently, forever 
o Ruth has returned to Canada for good. She won't ever live in the United 
States again. 
o Are you finished with school for good, or will you continue your studies 
some day? 
 
to call off: to cancel (S) 
o The referee called off the soccer game because of the darkness. 
o The president called the meeting off because she had to leave town. 
 
to put off: to postpone (S) 
o Many student's put off doing their assignments until the last minute. 
o Let's put the party off until next weekend, okay? 
 
in a hurry: hurried, rushed (also: in a rush) 
o Alex seems in a hurry; he must be late for his train again. 
o She's always in a rush in the morning to get the kids to school. 
 
LESSON 6 
 
under the weather: not feeling well, sick 
o John stayed home from work because he was feeling under the weather. 
o When you cat cold, you feel under the weather. 
 
to hang up: to place clothes on a hook or hanger (S); to replace the receiver 
on the phone at the end of a conversation (S) 
o Would you like me to hang up your coat for you in the closet? 
o The operator told me to hang the phone up and call the number again. 
 
to count on: to trust someone in time of need (also: to depend on) 
o I can count on my parents to help me in an emergency. 
o Don't depend on Frank to lend you any money; he doesn't have any. 
 
to make friends: to become friendly with others 
o Patricia is a shy girl and doesn't make friends easily. 
o During the cruise Ronald made friends with almost everyone on the 
ship. 
 
out of order: not in working condition 
o The elevator was out or order, so we had to walk to the tenth floor of 
the building. 
o We couldn't use the soft drink machine because it was out of order. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 8 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to get to: to be able to do something special; to arrive at a place, such as 
home, work, etc. for the second definition, do not use the preposition to with 
the words home or there. 
o The children got to stay up late and watch a good movie for the family. 
o I missed the bus and couldn't get to the office until ten o'clock. 
o When are you planning to get home tonight? 
 
few and far between: not frequent, unusual, rare 
o The times that our children get to stay up late are few and far between. 
o Airplane travel is very safe because accidents are few and far between. 
 
to look over: to examine, to inspect closely (also: to go over, to read over, 
to check over) (S) 
Go over is different from the other forms because it is not separable. 
o I want to look my homework over again before I give it to the teacher. 
o The politician went over his speech before the important presentation. 
o You should never sign any legal paper without checking it over first. 
 
to have (time) off: to have free time, not to have to work (also: to take 
time off (S)) 
The related form (S) to take time off is used when someone makes a decision 
to have free time, sometimes when others might not agree with the decision. 
o Every morning the company workers have time off for a coffee break. 
o Several workers took
 the afternoon off to go to a baseball game. 
 
to go on: to happen; to resume, to continue (also: to keep on) 
o Many people gathered near the accident to see what was going on. 
o I didn't mean to interrupt you. Please go on. 
o The speaker kept on talking even though most of the audience had left. 
 
to put out: extinguish, to cause to stop functioning (S) 
To put out has the same meaning as to turn off (Lesson 1) for a light fixture. 
o No smoking is allowed in here. Please put out your cigarette. 
o The fire fighters worked hard to put the brush fire out. 
o Please put out the light before you leave. Okay, I'll put it out. 
 
all of a sudden: suddenly, without warning (also: all at once) 
o All of a sudden Ed appeared at the door. We weren't expecting him to 
drop by. 
o All at once Millie got up and left the house without any explanation. 
 
LESSON 7 
 
to point out: to show, to indicate, to bring to one's attention (S) 
o What important buildings did the tour guide point out to you? 
o The teacher pointed out the mistakes in my composition. 
o A friend pointed the famous actor out to me. 
 
to be up: to expire, to be finished 
This idiom is used only with the word time as the subject. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 9 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o "The time is up," the teacher said at the end of the test period. 
o We have to leave the tennis court because our hour is up; some other 
people want to use it now. 
 
to be over: to be finished, to end (also: to be through) 
This idiom is used for activities and events. 
o After the dance was over, we all went to a restaurant. 
o The meeting was through ten minutes earlier than everyone expected. 
 
on time: exactly at the correct time, punctually 
o I thought that Margaret would arrive late, but she was right on time. 
o Did you get to work on time this morning, or did rush hour traffic delay 
you? 
in time to: before the time necessary to do something 
o We entered the theater just in time to see the beginning of the movie. 
o The truck was not able to stop in time to prevent an accident. 
 
to get better, worse, etc.: to become better, worse, etc. 
o Heather has been sick for a month, but now she is getting better. 
o This medicine isn't helping me. Instead of getting better, I'm getting 
worse. 
 
to get sick, well, tired, busy, wet, etc.: to become sick, well, tired, busy, 
wet, etc. 
This idiom consists of a combination of get and various adjectives. 
o Gerald got sick
 last week and has been in bed since that time. 
o Every afternoon I get very hungry, so I eat a snack. 
 
had better: should, ought to, be advisable to 
This idiom is most often used in contracted form (I'd better). 
o I think you'd better speak to Mr. White right away about this matter. 
o The doctor told the patient that he'd better go home and rest. 
 
would rather: prefer to (also: would just as soon) 
o Would you rather have the appointment this Friday or next Monday? 
o I would just as soon go for a walk as watch TV right now. 
 
to all it a day/night: to stop working for the test of the day/night 
o Herb tried to repair his car engine all morning before he called it a day 
and went fishing. 
o We've been working hard on this project all evening; let's call it a night. 
 
To figure out: to solve, to find a solution (S); to understand (S) 
o How long did it take you to figure out the answer to the math problem? 
o I was never able to figure it out. 
 
to think of: to have a (good or bad) opinion of 
This idiom is often used in the negative or with adjectives such as much and 
highly. 
o I don't think much of him as a baseball player; he's a slow runner and a 
poor hitter. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 10 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o James thinks highly of his new boss, who is a kind and helpful person. 
 
LESSON 8 
 
to be about to: to be at the moment of doing something, to be ready 
This idiom is often sued with the adverb just. 
o I was just about to leave when you telephoned. 
o Oh, hi, John. We're just about to eat dinner. 
 
to turn around: to move or face in the opposite direction (S); to completely 
change the condition of (S) 
o The man turned his car around and drove back the way he came. 
o The company has been very successful since the new business manager 
was able to turn it around. 
 
to take turns: to alternate, to change people while doing something 
o During the trip, Darlene and I took turns driving so that neither of us 
would tire out. 
o I have to make sure that my two sons take turns playing the video game. 
 
to pay attention (to): to look at and listen to someone while they are 
speaking, to concentrate 
o Please pay attention to me while I'm speaking to you! 
o You'll have to pay more attention in class if you want to get a good 
grade. 
 
to brush up on: to review something in order to refresh one's memory 
o Before I traveled to Mexico, I brushed up on my Spanish; I haven't 
practiced it since high school. 
o In order to take that advanced mathematics class, Sidney will have to 
brush up on his algebra. 
 
over and over (again): repeatedly (also: time after time, time and 
again) 
o The actress studied her lines in the movie over and over until she knew 
them well. 
o Children have difficulty remembering rules, so it's often necessary to 
repeat them over and over again. 
o Time and again I have to remind Bobby to put on his seatbelt in the car. 
 
to wear out: to use something until it has no value or worth anymore, to 
make useless through wear (S) 
o When I wear out these shoes, I'll have to buy some that last longer. 
o What do you do with your clothes after your wear them out? 
 
to throw away: to discard, to dispose of (S) 
o I generally throw away my clothes when I wear them out. 
o Don't throw the magazines away; I haven't read them yet. 
 
to fall in love: to begin to love 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 11 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
This idiom is used with the expression at first sight to indicate a sudden 
interest in love. 
o Ben and Sal fell in love in high school, and got married after graduation. 
o Have you ever fallen in love at first sight? 
 
to go out: to stop functioning; to stop burning; to leave home or work (also: 
to step out) 
o The lights went out all over the city because of an electrical problem. 
o The campers didn't have to put out the fire because it went out by itself. 
o Gary isn't here right now; he went out to the store for a moment. 
o I have to step out of the office briefly to pick up a newspaper. 
 
out of the question: impossible, not feasible 
o Stephen told Deborah that it was out of the question for her to borrow 
his new car. 
o Don't expect me to do that again. It's absolutely out of the question. 
 
to have to do with: to have some connection with or relationship to 
o Ralph insisted that he had nothing to do with breaking the window. 
o What does your suggestion have to do with our problem? 
 
LESSON 9 
 
to wake up: to arise from sleep, to awaken (S) 
Compare wake up and get up (Lesson 1) as used in the first example. 
o Marge woke up this morning very early, but she did not get up until 
about ten o'clock. 
o My alarm clock wakes me up at the same time every day. 
 
to be in charge of: to manage, to have responsibility for 
o Jane is in charge of the office while Mrs. Haig is a business trip. 
o Who is in charge of arrangements for the dance next week? 
 
as soon as: just after, when 
o As soon as it started to snow, the children ran outside with big smiles 
on their faces. 
o I'm busy now, but I'll meet you as soon as I've finished this work. 
 
to get in touch with: to communicate with, to contact 
o You can get in touch with him by calling the Burma Hotel. 
o I've been trying all morning to get in touch with Miss Peters, but her 
phone is always busy. 
 
to have a good time: to enjoy oneself 
o We all had a good time at the class reunion last night. 
o Did you have a good time at the park? I really enjoyed it. 
 
in no time: very quickly, rapidly 
This idiom can be used with the idiom at all to add emphasis to the certainty 
of the statement. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 12 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Mac said that he'd be ready to leave in no time. 
o We thought that the meeting would take two hours, but it was over in 
no time at all. 
 
to cut down on: 
to reduce, to lessen (also: to cut back on) 
o In order to lose weight, you have to cut down on your intake of sugar. 
o The doctor told me to cut back on exercise until my back injury heals. 
 
quite a few: many 
o Quite a few students were absent yesterday; in fact, more than half of 
them were not there. 
o We did not expect many people to attend to affair, but quite a few of 
our friends actually came. 
 
used to: formerly did, had the habit of 
This idiom is used to indicate a past situation, action, or habit that does not 
exist in the present. The idiom is always followed by a simple verb form. 
o I used to live in New York, but I moved to California two years ago. 
o Kim used to smoke cigarettes, but she stopped the habit last month. 
 
to be used to: be accustomed to 
This idiom refers to a situation, action, or habit that continues in the present. 
The idiom is always followed by a noun or gerund phrase. 
o He is used to this climate now, so the changes in temperature do not 
affect him much. 
o I am used to studying in the library, so it's difficult for me to study at 
home now. 
 
to get used to: to become used to, to become adjusted to 
This idiom describes the process of change that allows someone to be used to 
a situation, action, or habit. 
o It took Yoshiko a long time to get used to the food that her American 
host family served her. 
o Mark can't seem to get used to wearing contact lenses; recently he's 
been wearing his glasses a lot. 
 
back and forth
: in a backward and forward motion 
o The restless lion kept pacing back and forth along the front of its cage. 
o Grandmother finds it relaxing to sit in her rocking chair and move back 
and forth. 
 
LESSON 10 
 
to make sure: to be sure, to ascertain (also: to make certain) 
o Please make sure that you turn off the radio before you go out. 
o Could you make certain of the time? I don't want to miss that TV show. 
 
now and then: occasionally, sometimes (also: now and again, at times, 
from time to time, off and on, once in a while) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 13 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
Both now and then and once in a while can be preceded by the adjective every. 
Another idiom with the same meaning and form is 
every so often. 
o I don't see him very often, but (every) now and then we arrange to have 
lunch together. 
o Gary gets a cold (every) once in a while even though he takes good care 
of himself. 
o Every so often my brother and I get together for a camping trip. 
o I like to sleep late in the morning from time to time. 
 
to get rid of: to eliminate, to remove; to discard, to throw away 
o Jerry tried hard to get rid of the stain on his shirt, but he never 
succeeded. 
o The stain was so bad that Jerry finally had to get rid of his shirt. 
 
every other (one): every second (one), alternate (ones) 
o I play tennis with my father every other Saturday, so I usually play 
twice a month. 
o There were twenty problems in the exercise, but the teacher told us 
only to do every other one. Actually, doing ten problems was difficult 
enough. 
 
to go with: to match, to compare well in color to design; to date, to 
accompany (also: to go out with) 
For the first definition, adverbs such as well and poorly are often used. 
o That striped shirt goes well with the gray pants, but the pants go poorly 
with those leather shoes. 
o Eda went with Richard for about six months, but now she is going out 
with a new boyfriend. 
 
first-rate: excellent, superb 
o The food served in that four-star restaurant is truly first-rate. 
o The Beverly Hills Hotel provides 
first-rate service to its guests. 
 
to come from: to originate from 
This idiom is commonly used in discussion of one's home town, state, or 
country. 
o What country in South American does she come from? She comes from 
Peru. 
o I just learned that he really comes from Florida, not Texas. 
o Where did this package come from? The mail carrier brought it. 
 
to make good time: to travel a sufficient distance at a reasonable speed 
The adjective excellent can also be used. 
o On our last trip, it rained the entire time, so we didn't make good time. 
o We made excellent time on our trip to Florida; it only took eighteen 
hours. 
 
to mix up: to stir or shake well (S); to confuse, to bewilder (S) 
For the second definition, the passive forms to be mixed up or to get mixed up 
are often used. 
o You should mix up the ingredients well before you put them in the pan. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 14 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o The teacher's poor explanation really mixed the students up. 
o The students think it's their fault that they are mixed up so often. 
 
to see about: to give attention or time to (also: to attend to, to see to) 
o Who is going to see about getting us a larger room for the meeting? 
o I'll see to arranging music for the wedding of you attend to the 
entertainment. 
 
to make out: to do, to succeed, to progress 
o Charlie didn't make out very well on his final examinations. He may 
have to repeat one or more classes. 
o How did Rachelle make out on her acting audition in Hollywood 
yesterday? 
 
by heart: by memorizing 
o He knows many passages form Shakespeare by heart. 
o Do you know all the idioms you have studied in this book by heart? 
 
LESSON 11 
 
to keep out: not to enter, not allow to enter (S) 
o There was a large sign outside the door that said, "Danger! Keep out!" 
o I've told you to keep the dog out of the house. 
 
to keep away (from): to stay at a distance (from) (S); to avoid use of (also: 
stay away from) 
o Please be sure to keep the children away from the street! 
o The signs on the burned-out house said, "Keep Away! Danger Zone." 
o It's important for your health to stay away from dangerous drugs. 
 
to find fault with: criticize, to complain about something 
o It is very easy to find fault with the work of others, but more difficult to 
accept criticism of one's own work. 
o Mrs. Johnson is always finding fault with her children, but they really 
try to please their mother. 
 
to be up to: to be responsible for deciding; to be doing as a regular activity 
The second definition is most often used in a question as a form of greeting. 
o I don't care whether we go to the reception or not. It's up to you. 
o Hi, George. I haven't seen you in a while. What have you been up to? 
 
ill at ease: uncomfortable or worried in a situation 
o Speaking in front of a large audience makes many people feel ill at ease. 
o My wife and I were ill at ease because our daughter was late coming 
home from a date. 
 
to do over: to revise, to do again (S) 
A noun or pronoun must separate the two parts of this idiom. 
o You'd better do the letter over because it is written so poorly. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 15 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Jose made so many mistakes in his homework that the teacher made 
him do it over. 
 
to look into: to investigate, to examine carefully (also: to check into) 
o The police are looking into the matter of the stolen computers. 
o The congressional committee will check into the financial dealings of 
the government contractor. 
 
to take hold of: to grasp, to grip with the heads 
o You should take hold of the railing as you go down those steep stairs. 
o The blind man took hold of my arm as I led him across the street. 
 
to get through: to finish, to complete 
This idiom is followed either by the –ing form of a verb (a gerund) or by the 
preposition with. 
o I didn't get through studying last night until almost eleven o'clock. 
o At what time does your wife get through with work every day? 
 
from now on: from this time into the future 
o Mr. Lee's doctor told him to cut down on eating fatty foods from now 
on, or else he might suffer heart disease. 
o I'm sorry that I dropped by at a bad time. From now on I'll call you first. 
 
to keep track of: to keep or maintain a record of; to remember the location 
of 
o Steve keeps track of all the long-distance telephone calls related to his 
business that he makes from his house. 
o With seven small children, how do the Wilsons keep track of all of them? 
 
to be carried away: to be greatly affected by a strong feeling (S) 
This idiom can also be used with get instead of be. 
o Paula and Leanne were carried away
 by the sad movie that they saw 
together. 
o James got carried away with anger when his roommate crashed his 
new car into a telephone pole. 
 
LESSON 12 
 
up to date: modern; current, timely 
Hyphens (-) separate the parts of this idiom when it precedes a noun form, as 
in the third example. The verb to update derives from this idiom. 
o The president insisted that the company bring its aging equipment up 
to date. 
o This catalog is not up to date. It was published several years ago. 
o The news program gave an up-to-date account of the nuclear accident. 
The newscaster said that he would update the news report every half 
hour. 
 
out of date: not modern; not current, not timely; no longer available in 
published form 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 16 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
Again, hyphens separate the parts of this idiom when it precedes a noun form 
as, in the second example. The passive verb to be outdated derives from this 
idiom. 
o Many people buy new cars when their old cars become out of date. 
o I don't know why Gene likes to wear out-of-date cloth. His clothes are 
so outdated that even his girlfriend hesitates to be seen with him. 
o This book can't be ordered any more because it is out of date. 
 
to blow up: to inflate, to fill with air (S); to explode, to destroy (or be 
destroyed) by explosion (S) 
o Daddy, could you please blow up this balloon for me? 
o When the airplane crashed into the ground, it blew up immediately. 
o The military had to blow the missile up in midair when it started to go 
the wrong way. 
 
to catch fire: to begin to burn 
o Don't stand too close to the gas stove. Your clothes may catch fire. 
o No one seems to know how the old building caught fire. 
 
to burn down: to burn slowly, but completely (usually said of candles); to 
destroy completely by fire (S) 
o There was a large amount of wax on the table where the candles had 
burned down. 
o The fire spread so quickly that the firefighters could not prevent the 
whole block of buildings from burning down. 
 
to burn up: to destroy completely by fire (S); to make angry or very annoyed 
(S) (also to tick off) 
To burn up and to burn down (previous idiom) share the same definition but 
also have different definitions. 
o She didn't want anyone to see the letter, so she burned
 it up and threw 
the ashes away. 
o It really burns me up that he borrowed my car without asking me first. 
o Mike got ticked off that his friends never offered to help him move to 
his new apartment. He had to do everything himself. 
 
to burn out: to stop functioning because of overuse; to make tired from too 
muck work (S) 
o This light bulb has burned out. Could you get another one? 
o Studying all day for my final exams has really burned me out. 
 
to make good: to succeed 
o He is a hard worker, and I'm sure that he will make good in that new 
job. 
o Alma has always made good in everything that she has done. 
 
stands to reason: to be clear and logical 
This idiom is almost always used with the pronoun subject it and is followed 
by a that clause. 
o It stands to reason that a person without experience. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 17 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o It stands to reason that he isn't going to pass the course if he never 
studies. 
 
to break out: to become widespread suddenly 
o An epidemic of measles broke out in Chicago this past week. 
o If a nuclear war ever breaks out, it is unlikely that many people will 
survive. 
o The news says that a large fire has broken out in a huge chemical plant. 
 
as for: regarding, concerning (also: as to) 
o As for the money, we will simply have to borrow some more from the 
bank. 
o There is no doubt as to her intelligence; she's the smartest one in the 
class. 
 
to feel sorry for: to pity, to feel compassion for (also: to take pity on) 
o Don't you feel sorry for someone who has to work the night shift? 
o I helped drive Pierre around when he broke his foot because I took pity 
on him. 
 
LESSON 13 
 
to break down: to stop functioning 
Compare this idiom with to burn out in Lesson 12. To burn out means that 
electrical equipment becomes hot from overuse and stops functioning. To 
break down means that something stops functioning mechanically, whether 
from overuse or not. 
o I just bought my new car yesterday and already it has broken down. 
o The elevator broke down, so we walked all the way up to the top floor. 
 
to turn out: to become or result; to appear, to attend (also: to come out) 
The noun form turnout derives from the second definition of the idiom. 
o Most parents wonder how their children will turn out as adults. 
o Hundreds of people came out for the demonstration against new taxes. 
o What was the turnout for the public hearing on the education reforms? 
 
once in a blue moon: rarely, infrequently 
o Snow falls on the city of San Diego, California, once in a blue moon. 
o Once in a blue moon my wife and I eat at a very expensive restaurant. 
 
to give up: to stop trying, to stop a bad habit (S); to surrender (S) 
o I'm sure that you can accomplish this task. Don't give up yet! 
o If you give up smoking now, you can certainly live a longer life. 
o The soldiers gave themselves up in the face of a stronger enemy forces. 
 
to cross out: to cancel by marking with a horizontal lines (S) 
o The teacher crossed out several incorrect words in Tanya's composition. 
o I crossed the last line out of my letter because it had the wrong tone to 
it. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 18 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to take for granted: not to appreciate fully (S); to assume to be true without 
giving much thought (S) 
A noun or pronoun often follows the verb take. 
o John took his wife for granted until once when he was very sick and 
needed her constant attention for a week. 
o He spoke English so well that I took it for granted he was an American. 
o He took for granted that I wasn't American because I spoke English so 
poorly! 
 
to take into account: to consider a fact while evaluating a situation (S) 
Again, a noun or pronoun often follows the verb take. 
o The judge took the prisoner's young age into account before sentencing 
him to three months in jail. 
o Educators should take into account the cultural backgrounds of 
students when planning a school curriculum. 
 
to make clear: to clarify, to explain (S) 
o Please make clear that he should never act so impolitely again. 
o The supervisor made it clear to the workers that they had to increase 
their productivity. 
 
clear-cut: clearly stated, definite, apparent 
o The president's message was clear-cut: the company had to reduce 
personnel immediately. 
o Professor Larsen is well known for his interesting and clear-cut 
presentations. 
 
to have on: to be wearing (S) 
o How do you like the hat which Grace has on today? 
o When Sally came into the room, I had nothing on except my shorts. 
 
to come to: to regain consciousness; to equal, to amount to 
o At first they thought that the man was dead, but soon he came to. 
o The bill for groceries at the supermarket came to fifty dollars. 
 
to call for: to require; to request, to urge 
o This cake recipe calls for some baking soda, but we don't have any. 
o The member of Congress called for new laws to regulate the banking 
industry. 
 