
SECTION TWO --- INTERMEDIATE 
 
LESSON 14 
 
to eat in/to eat out: to eat at home/to eat in a restaurant 
o I feel too tired to go out for dinner. Let's eat in again tonight. 
o When you eat out, what restaurant do you generally go to? 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 19 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
cut and dried: predictable, known beforehand; boring 
o The results of the national election were rather cut and dried; the 
Republicans won easily. 
o A job on a factory assembly line is certainly cut and dried. 
 
to look after: to watch, to supervise, to protect (also: to take care of, to 
keep an eye on) 
o Grandma will look after the baby while we go to the lecture. 
o Who is going to take care of your house plants while you are away? 
o I'd appreciate it if you'd keep an eye on my car while I'm in the store. 
 
to feel like: to have the desire to, to want to consider 
This idiom is usually followed by a gerund (the –ing form of a verb used as a 
noun). 
o I don't feel like studying tonight. Let's go to a basketball game. 
o I feel like taking a long walk. Would you like to go with me? 
 
once and for all: finally, absolutely 
o My daughter told her boyfriend once and for all that she wouldn't date 
him anymore. 
o Once and for all, john has quit smoking cigarettes. 
 
to hear from: to receive news or information from 
To hear from is used for receiving a letter, telephone call, etc., from a person 
or organization. 
o I don't hear from my brother very often since he moved to Chicago. 
o Have you heard from the company about that new job? 
 
to hear of: to know about, to be familiar with; to consider 
The second definition is always used in the negative. 
o When I asked for directions to Mill Street, the police officer said that 
she had never heard of it. 
o Byron strongly disagreed with my request by saying, "I won't hear of 
it!" 
 
to make fun of: to laugh at, to joke about 
o They are making fun of Carla's new hair style. Don't you think that it's 
really strange? 
o Don't make fun of Jose's English. He's doing the best he can. 
 
to come true: to become reality, to prove to be correct 
o The weatherman's forecast for today's weather certainly came true. 
o Everything that the economists predicted about the increased cost of 
living has come true. 
 
as a matter of fact: really, actually (also: in fact) 
o Hans thinks he knows English well but, as a matter of fact, he speaks 
very poorly. 
o I didn't say that. In fact, I said quite the opposite. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 20 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to have one's way: to arrange matters the way one wants (especially when 
someone else doesn't want to same way) (also: to get one's way) 
o My brother always wants to have his way, but this time our parents 
said that we could do what I wanted. 
o If Sheila doesn't get her way, she becomes very angry. 
 
to look forward to: to expect or anticipate with pleasure 
This idiom can be followed by a regular noun or a gerund. 
o We're greatly looking forward to our vacation in Mexico. 
o Margaret never looks forward to going to work. 
 
LESSON 15 
 
inside out: with the inside facing the outside 
o Someone should tell little Bobby that his shirt is inside out. 
o The high winds ruined the umbrella by blowing it inside out. 
 
upside down: with the upper side turned toward the lower side 
o The accident caused on car to turn upside down, its wheels spinning in 
the air. 
o One of the students was only pretending to read her textbook; the 
teacher could see that the book was actually upside down. 
 
to fill in: to write answers in (S); to inform, to tell (S) 
For the second definition, the idiom can be followed by the preposition on and 
the information that someone is told. 
o You should be careful to fill in the blanks on the registration form 
correctly. 
o Barry was absent from the meeting, so I'd better fill him in. 
o Has anyone filled the boss in on the latest public relation disaster? 
 
to fill out: to complete a form (S) 
This idiom is very similar to the first definition above. To fill in refers to 
completing various parts of a form, while to fill out refers to completing a form 
as one whole item. 
o Every prospective employee must fill out an application by giving name, 
address, previous jobs, etc. 
o The teenager had some trouble filling the forms out by himself, so his 
mother helped him. 
 
to take advantage of: to use well, to profit from; to use another person's 
weaknesses to gain what one wants 
o I took advantage of my neighbor's superior skill at tennis to improve 
my own ability at the game. 
o Teddy is such a small, weak child that his friends take advantage of 
him all the time. They 
take advantage of him by demanding money 
and making him do things for them. 
 
no matter: regardless of 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 21 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
This idiom is a shortened form of it doesn't matter. It is followed by a question 
word such as how, where, when, who, etc. 
o No matter how much money he spends on his clothes, he never looks 
well dressed. 
o No matter where that escaped prisoner tries to hide, the police will find 
him sooner or later. 
 
to take up: to begin to do or study, to undertake (S); to occupy space, time, 
or energy (S) 
o After today's exam, the class will be ready to take up the last chapter in 
the book. 
o The piano takes up too much space in our living room. However, it 
would take too much time up to move it right now; so we'd better wait 
until later. 
 
to take up with: to consult someone about an important matter (S) 
The important matter follows the verb take, while the person consulted 
follows with. 
o Can I take the problem up with you right now? It's quite urgent. 
o I can't help you with this matter. You'll have to take it up with the 
manager. 
 
to take after: to resemble a parent or close relative (for physical appearance 
only, also: to look like) 
o Which of your parents do you take after the most? 
o Sam looks like his father, but he takes after his mother in personality. 
 
in the long run: eventually, after a long period of time 
This idiom is similar in meaning to sooner or later (Lesson 1). The difference 
is that in the long run refers to a more extended period of time. 
o 
In the long run, the synthetic weave in this carpet will wear better than 
the woolen one. You won't have to replace it so soon. 
o If you work hard at your marriage, you'll find out that, in the long run, 
your spouse can be your best friend in life. 
 
in touch: having contact 
o James will be in touch with us soon to relay the details of the plan. 
o I certainly enjoyed seeing you again after all these years. Let's be sure to 
keep in touch. 
 
out of touch: not having contact; not having knowledge of 
o Marge and I had been out of touch for years, but then suddenly she 
called me up the other day. 
o Larry has been so busy that he seems out of touch with world events. 
 
LESSON 16 
 
on one's toes: alert, cautious 
This idiom is usually used with the verbs stay and keep. 
o It's important for all the players on a soccer team to stay on their toes. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 22 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o We'd better keep on our toes while we're walking along the dark 
portions of this street. 
 
to get along: to make progress; to manage to live in a certain state of health 
o Juan is getting along very well in his English studies. 
o How is Mr. Richards getting along after his long illness? 
 
hard of hearing: partially deaf, not able to hear well 
o You'll have to speak a little louder. Mrs. Evans is hard of hearing. 
o Please don't shout. I'm not hard of hearing. 
o Listening to loud music too much can make you hard of hearing. 
 
to see eye to eye: to agree, to concur 
o I'm glad that we see eye to eye on the matter of the conference location. 
o A husband and wife don't always see eye to eye with each other, but a 
good marriage can survive small disagreements. 
 
to have in mind: to be considering, to be thinking (S) 
o I don't want to see a movie now. I have in mind going to the park. 
o It's up to you what we eat tonight. Do you have anything in mind? 
 
to keep in mind: to remember, not to forget (S) (also: to bear in mind) 
Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632
o I didn't know that Paula doesn't like vegetables. We should bear that in 
mind next time we invite her for dinner. 
o Please keep in mind that you promised to call Stan around noon. 
 
for once: this one time, for only one time 
o For once I was able to win a game of golf against Steve, who is a much 
better player than I am. 
o
 Dad, for once would you please let me drive the new car? 
 
to go off: to explode; to sound as an alarm; to leave suddenly without 
explanation 
o The accident happened when a box of firecrackers went off accidentally. 
o For what time did you set the alarm clock to go off tomorrow morning? 
o Vince went off without saying good-bye to anybody; I hope he wasn't 
angry. 
 
to grow out of: to outgrow, to become too old for; to be a result of 
o He still bites his nails now and then, but soon he'll grow out of the 
habit. 
o The need for the salary committee grew out of worker dissatisfaction 
with the pay scale. 
 
to make the best of: to do the best that one can in a poor situation 
o If we can't find a larger apartment soon, we'll just have to make the best 
of it right here. 
o Even though the Martinez family is having financial problems, they 
make the best of everything by enjoying the simple pleasures of life. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS  - 23 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to cut off: to shorten by cutting the ends (S); to disconnect or stop suddenly 
(S) 
o The rope was two feet longer than we needed, so we cut off the extra 
length. 
o The operator cut our long-distance phone conversation off after two 
minutes. 
 
to cut out: to remove by cutting (S); to stop doing something (S) (for the 
second definition, also: to knock it off) 
For the second definition, the idiom is usually separated by the pronoun it. 
o The child likes to cut out pictures form the newspaper and to paste 
them in a notebook. 
o He kept bothering her, so finally she told him to cut it out. However, he 
wouldn't knock it off until her larger brother appeared. 
 
LESSON 17 
 
to blow out: to explode, to go flat (for tires); to extinguish by blowing (S) 
o On our trip to Colorado, one of the car tires blew out when it hit a large 
hole in the road. 
o Little Joey wasn't able to blow all the candles out, so his big sister 
helped him. 
 
to become of: to happen to (a missing object or person) 
This idiom is always used in a clause beginning with what. 
o What has become of my pencil? I had it ten minutes ago, but now I 
can't find it. 
o I wondered what became of you. I looked around the shopping center 
for two hours, but I couldn't find you at all. 
 
to shut up: to close for a period of time (S); to be quiet, to stop talking 
The second definition of this idiom is impolite in formal situations. 
o During the hurricane, all the store owners shut their shops up. 
o Bob's sister told him to shut up and not say anything more about it. 
o The student got into big trouble for telling his teacher to shut up. 
 
have got: to have, to possess 
o Curtis has got a bad cold. He's sneezing and coughing a lot. 
o How much money have you got with you right now? 
 
have got to: must (also: have to) 
o She has got to go to Chicago today to sign the contract papers. 
o I have to be back home by two o'clock or my wife will feel ill at ease. 
 
to keep up with: to maintain the same speed or rate as 
o Frieda works so fast that no one in the office can keep up with her. 
o You'll have to walk more slowly. I can't keep up with
 you. 
 
on the other hand: however, in contrast 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 24 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Democracies provide people many freedoms and privileges. On the 
other hand, democracies suffer many serious problems such as crime 
and unemployment. 
o My sister takes after my father in appearance. On the other hand, I take 
after my mother. 
 
to turn down: to reduce in brightness or volume (S); to reject, to refuse (S) 
o Please turn down the radio for me. It's too loud while I'm studying. 
o Laverne wanted to join the military but the recruiting officer turned her 
application down because Laverne is hard of hearing in one ear. 
 
fifty-fifty: divided into two equal parts 
o Let's go fifty-fifty on the cost of a new rug for our apartment. 
o The political candidate has a fifty-fifty chance of winning the election. 
 
to break in: gradually to prepare something for use that is new and stiff (S); 
to interrupt (for the second definition, also: 
to cut in) 
o It is best to break a new car in by driving it slowly for the first few 
hundred miles. 
o While Carrie and I were talking, Bill broke in to tell me about a 
telephone call. 
o Peter, it's very impolite to cut in like that while others are speaking. 
 
a lost cause: a hopeless case, a person or situation having no hope of positive 
change. 
o It seems that Charles will never listen to our advice. I suppose it's a lost 
cause. 
o The police searched for the missing girl for two weeks, but finally gave 
it up as a lost cause. 
o Children who have committed several crimes as teenagers and show no 
sorrow about their actions are generally lost causes. 
 
above all: mainly, especially 
o Above all, don't mention the matter to Gerard; he's the last person we 
should tell. 
o Sheila does well in all her school subjects, but above all in mathematics. 
Her math scores are always over 95 percent. 

LESSON 18 
 
to do without: survive or exist without something (also: to go without) 
With prices so high now, I'll have to do without a new suit this year. 
o As a traveling salesperson, Monica can't do without a car. 
o It's a shame that so many poor people in the world have to go without 
basic necessities of life such as nutritious food and suitable shelter. 
 
according to: in the order of; on the authority of 
o The students on the football team were ranked according to height, 
from shortest to tallest. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 25 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o According to my dictionary, you are using that word in your essay 
incorrectly. 
 
to be bound to: to be certain to, to be sure to 
This idiom is used when the occurrence of an event seems inevitable or 
unavoidable. 
o We are bound to be late if you don't hurry up. 
o With the economy improving now, their business is bound to make 
more money this year. 
 
for sure: without doubt (also: for certain) 
o In the dark, I couldn't tell for sure whether it was Polly or Sarah who 
drove by. 
o I now for certain that Gene will move back to Washington next month. 
 
to take for: to perceive or understand as (S) 
This idiom is usually used when someone is mistakenly perceived. A noun or 
pronoun must separate the idiom. 
o Because of his strong, muscular body, I took him for a professional 
athlete. As it turns out, he doesn't play any professional sports. 
o What do you take me for --- a fool? I don't believe what you're saying at 
all. 
 
to try out: to test, to use during a trial period (S) 
o You can try out the new car before you decide to buy it. 
o I can let you try the computer out for a few days before you make a 
decision. 
 
to tear down: to destroy by making flat, to demolish (S) 
o The construction company had to tear down the old hotel in order to 
build a new office building. 
o The owners had to 
tear the house down after it burned down in a fire. 
 
to tear up: to rip into small pieces (S) 
o Diedre tore up the letter angrily and threw all the pieces into the trash 
can. 
o He told the lawyer to tear the old contract up and then to prepare a 
new one. 
 
to go over: to be appreciated or accepted 
This idiom is usually followed by the adverb well. (I Lesson 6 this idiom has 
the meaning to review, as in the second sentence of the second example 
below.) 
o The teacher's organized lessons always go over well with her students. 
o The comedian's jokes weren't going over well; the audience wasn't 
laughing much at all. I think that the comedian should go over his 
material more carefully before each act. 
 
to run out of: to exhaust the supply of, not to have more of 
o We ran out of gas right in the middle of the main street in town. 
o It's dangerous to run out of water if you are in an isolated area. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 26 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
at heart: basically, fundamentally 
This idiom is used to describe the true character of a person. 
o James sometimes seems quite unfriendly, but at heart he's a good 
person. 
o The Fares often don't see eye to eye, but at heart they both love each 
other very much. 
 
about to: ready to, just going to 
o We were about to leave the house when the phone rang. 
o I'm sorry that I broke in. What were you about to say? 
 
LESSON 19 
 
to bite off: to accept as a responsibility or task 
This idiom is often used when one accepts more responsibility than one can 
handle alone. It is usually used in the form to bite off more than one can chew. 
o When I accepted the position of chairman, I didn't realize how much I 
was biting off. 
o When James registered for 18 units in his last semester at college, he 
bit off more than he could chew. 
 
to tell apart: to distinguish between (also: to pick apart, to tell from) (S) 
o The two brothers look so much alike that few people can tell them 
apart. 
o That copy machine is so good that I can't pick the photocopy and the 
original apart. 
o Most new cars are very similar in appearance. It's almost impossible to 
tell one from another. 
 
all in all: considering everything 
o There were a few problems, but all in all it was a well-organized 
seminar. 
o Leonard got a low grade in one subject, but all in all he's a good student. 
 
to pass out: to distribute (also: to hand out) (S); to lose consciousness 
The verbal idiom to hand out can be made into the noun handout to refer to 
items that are distributed in a class or meeting. 
o Please help me pass out these test papers; there must be a hundred of 
them. 
o Alright, students, here are the class handouts for this week. 
o The weather was so hot in the soccer stadium that some of the fans in 
the stands passed out. 
 
to go around: to be sufficient or adequate for everyone present; to circulate, 
to move from place to place 
o We thought that we had bought enough food and drink for the party, 
but actually there wasn't enough to go around. 
o There's a bad strain of influenza going a 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 27 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to be in (the/one's) way: to block or obstruct; not to be helpful, to cause 
inconvenience (for both, also: to get in the/one's way) 
o Jocelyn couldn't drive through the busy intersection because a big truck 
was in the way. 
o Our small child tried to help us paint the house, but actually he just got 
in our way. 
 
to put on: to gain (pounds or weight) (S); to present, to perform (S) 
o Bob has put on a lot of weight recently. He must have put at least 
fifteen pounds on. 
o The Youth Actor's Guild put on a wonderful version of Romeo and 
Juliet at the globe Theater. 
 
to put up: to tolerate, to accept unwillingly 
o The employee was fired because his boss could not put up with his 
mistakes any longer. 
o While I'm studying, I can't put up with any noise or other distractions. 
 
in vain: useless, without the desired result 
o All the doctors' efforts to save the injured woman were in vain. She was 
declared dead three hours after being admitted to the hospital. 
o We tried in vain to reach you last night. Is your phone out of order? 
 
day in and day out: continuously, constantly (also: day after day; for 
longer periods of time, year in and year out and year after year) 
o During the month of April, it rained day in and day out. 
o Day after day I waited for a letter from him, but one never came. 
o
 Year in and year out, the weather in San Diego is the best in the nation. 
 
to catch up: to work with the purpose of fulfilling a requirement or being 
equal to others 
The idiom is often followed by the preposition with and a noun phrase. It is 
similar in meaning to 
keep up with from Lesson 17. 
o The student was absent from class so long that it took her a long time to 
catch up. 
o If you are not equal to others, first you have to catch up with them 
before you can keep up with them. 
 
Lesson 20 
 
to hold still: not to move (S) 
o Please hold still while I adjust your tie. 
o If you don't hold that camera still, you'll get a blurred picture. 
 
to know by sight: to recognize (S) 
This idiom is used when the person has been seen previously but is not known 
personally. The person must be used to separate the idiom. 
o I have never met our new neighbors; I simply know them by sight. 
o The woman said that she would know the thief by sight if she ever saw 
him again. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 28 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to be the matter: to be unsatisfactory, to be improper, to be wrong 
In a question, this idiom is used with what or something. In an answer, 
something or nothing is usually used. 
o A: What is the matter, Betty? You look very upset. 
o B: Yes, something is the matter. I've lost my purse! 
o A: Is something the matter, Charles? You don't look well. 
o B: No, nothing is the matter. I'm just a little under the weather. 
 
to bring up: to rear, to raise from childhood (S); to mention, to raise an issue, 
to introduce a topic (S) 
o Parents should bring up their children to be responsible members of 
society. 
o Sarah wanted to bring the scheduling problem up at the club meeting, 
but finally she decided against doing so. 
o One of the students brought up an interesting point related to the 
subject in our textbook. 
 
to get lost: to become lost; to go away in order not to bother 
The second definition provides a very informal, even rude, meaning that 
should be used only with close friends. It is sometimes used in a joking 
manner. 
o While driving in Boston, we got lost and drove many miles in the wrong 
direction. 
o Todd kept bothering me while I was studying, so I told him to get lost. 
o Lisa joked that she wanted her sister to get lost forever. 
 
to hold up: to delay, to make late (S); to remain high in quality 
o A big accident held up traffic on the highway for several hours. 
o Deidre is amazed at how well her car has held up
 over the years. 
 
to run away: to leave without permission; to escape 
o The young couple ran away and got married because their parents 
wouldn't permit it. 
o That cat is just like a criminal --- it runs away from anyone who tries to 
come near! 
 
to rule out: to refuse to consider, to prohibit (S) 
o Heather ruled out applying to college in Texas because she would 
rather go to school in Canada. 
o I'd like to watch a good movie on TV tonight, but a ton of homework 
rules that out. 
 
by far: by a great margin, clearly 
o Jacquie is by far the most intelligent student in our class. 
o This is by far the hottest, most humid summer we've had in years. 
 
to see off: to say good-bye upon departure by train, airplane, bus, etc. (also: 
to send off) (S) 
A noun or pronoun must divide the idiom. 
o We are going to the airport to see Peter off on his trip to Europe. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 29 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o When I left for Cincinnati on a business trip, no one came to the train 
station to send me off. 
 
to see out: to accompany a person out of a house, building, etc. (S) 
A noun or pronoun must again divide the idiom. 
o The Johnsons were certain to see their guests out as each one left the 
party. 
o Would you please see me out to the car? It's very dark outside.] 
 
no wonder: it's no surprise that, not surprisingly 
This idiom derives form reducing it is no wonder that... 
o No wonder the portable heater doesn't work. It's not plugged into the 
electrical outlet! 
o Jack has been out of town for several weeks. No wonder we haven't 
seen him recently. 
 
LESSON 21 
 
to go up: to increase (also: to drive up); to be constructed, to be erected 
The second definition is the same as the one for to put up in Lesson 19, except 
that go up is not used with a noun object. 
o Economists are predicting that consumer prices are going up. Inflation 
always has a tendency to drive up the cost of products. 
o A new office is going up in the downtown area. A major construction 
company is putting it up. 
 
to go up to: to approach (also: to come up to, to walk up to, to run up to, 
to drive up to, etc.) 
The related forms have the same meaning, but the type of movement is 
different. 
o After the lecture, several people in the audience went up to the speaker 
to congratulate her. 
o The little girl came up to me and shook my hand as if she had known 
me for years. 
o Bill's friend didn't want to admit that they had gotten lost, but finally he 
agreed to drive up to a gas station and inquire about the correct route. 
 
to hand in: to submit or deliver something that is due (S) 
o Every student has to hand in an original composition each week of the 
semester. 
o All the salepeople hand their weekly reports in on Friday. 
 
in case: in order to be prepared if 
When the idiom occurs at the end of the sentence (the second example), then 
the meaning is in order to be prepared if something happens. The 
"something" might be an accident, a delay, etc. 
o You'd better close the windows in case it rains. 
o We should be sure to leave for the airport early, just in case. 
o Cynthia, take one of your books 
in case you have some time to read on 
our trip. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 30 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to take apart: to disassemble, to separate the parts of something (S) 
A noun or pronoun usually divides this idiom. 
o It is much easier to take a watch apart than it is to assemble it. 
o The engine had a serious problem, so the mechanic had to take it apart 
completely in order to fix it. 
 
to put together: to assemble (S) 
A noun or pronoun usually divides this idiom. The preposition back is used 
when something has been disassembled and then is being reassembled, as in 
the second example. 
o Todd followed the directions on the box but he couldn't manage to put 
the bicycle together properly. 
o After the teenager took the broken video game apart and fixed it, he 
was unable to put it back together again. 
 
to be better off: to be in a more favorable condition or situation 
The opposite of this idiom is to be worse off. 
o Jim would be better off staying at home because of his cold. 
o You'd be much better off working in an office than in a factory. 
o The economies of some nations are worse off than they were several 
decades ago. 
 
to be well-off: to have enough money to enjoy a comfortable life, to be rich 
(also: to be well-to-do) 
o They live in the best section of town in a large home; they are very well-
off. 
o By the time I reach the age of fifty-five, I hope to be well-to-do and to 
travel frequently. 
 
to take by surprise: to surprise, to amaze, to astonish (S) 
A noun or pronoun usually divides this idiom. 
o The offer of a high-paying position with another company took me by 
surprise. 
o The president's announcement that the university was in financial 
trouble didn't take anyone by surprise. 
 
to keep in touch with: to maintain contact with (also: to stay in touch 
with) 
This idiom should be compared with to get in touch with in Lesson 9. 
o You can telephone me every few days, and in that way we can keep in 
touch with each other. 
o He promised to stay in touch with us while he was abroad. However, we 
were very disappointed that he never did get in touch with us. 
 
to name after: to give the same name as another (S) 
o Helen's parents named Helen after her grandmother. 
o My grandson is named after Calvin Coolidge, the 30
th
 President of the 
United States. 
 
to hold on: to grasp tightly or firmly; to wait, to be patient 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 31 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
The second definition is often used when someone is talking on the telephone. 
o The little girl held on to her mother's hand and refused to let go as they 
walked through the large crowd of people. 
o (on the telephone) Could you please hold on a moment while I get a 
pencil and paper? 
o Come on, Mike, hold on. I can't get ready so quickly. 
 
LESSON 22 
 
to stop by: to visit or stop somewhere briefly in order to do something 
o James had to stop by the registrar's office to submit a transcript 
request form. 
o Let's stop by the supermarket and pick up a few grocery items. 
 
to drop (someone) a line: to write a note to someone (S) 
o As soon as I get to Florida, I'll drop you a line and tell you about my 
new job. 
o If you have time, drop me a line now and then while you're traveling. 
 
to come across: to meet or find unexpectedly (also: to run across); to be 
perceived or judged as (also: to come off) 
o While Cheryl was cleaning the attic, she came across some very old 
coins. It took her by surprise to run across something like that. 
o Jeff's boss comes across as a tough, unpleasant person, but actually Jeff 
says that he is a good employer. 
o Some people come off quite differently than they really are. 
 
to stand for: 
to represent, to signify; to tolerate 
The second definition is usually used in a negative sense. The meaning is the 
same as to put up with in Lesson 19. 
o On the American flag, each start stands for one of the fifty states, and 
each stripe stands for one of the original thirteen colonies of the 1800s. 
o The citizens wouldn't stand for the increase in crime in their city, so 
they hired more police officers and built another jail. 
 
to stand a chance: to have the possibility of accomplishing something 
This idiom is often used with an adjective such as good or excellent. It also 
occurs in the negative, sometimes with the adjective much. 
o The New York baseball team stands a good chance of winning the 
World Series this year. 
o Because John doesn't have any previous work experience, he doesn't 
stand a chance of getting that job. 
o The woman injured in the serious train accident doesn't stand much 
chance of surviving. 
 
to take pains: to work carefully and conscientiously 
o She takes pains to do everything well; she's our best employee. 
o He took great pains with his last assignment because he needed to get 
an excellent grade to pass the class. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 32 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to look on: to watch as a spectator, to observe 
o Hundreds of people were looking on as the police and firefighters 
rescued the passengers in the wrecked train. 
o I stayed with my son at his first soccer practice and looked on as the 
coach worked with the boys. 
 
to look up to: to admire, to respect greatly 
o Children will most certainly look up to their parents if the children are 
brought up well. 
o Everyone looks up to the director of our department because he is a 
kind and generous person. 
 
to look down on: to feel superior to, to think of someone as less important 
o People who are in positions of power should be careful not to look 
down on those who work for them. 
o Why does Alma look down on Mario just because his family is so poor? 
 
to take off: to leave the ground (for airplanes); to leave, often in a hurry 
The noun form takeoff derives from this idiom. 
o The plane took off over an hour late. The passengers had to buckle their 
seatbelts during takeoff. 
o Do you have to take off already? You just arrive an hour ago! 
 
to pull off: to succeed in doing something difficult (S); to exit to the side of a 
highway 
o The group of investors pulled off a big deal by buying half the stock in 
that company. I wonder how they pulled it off before the company 
could prevent it. 
o The motorist pulled off when the police officer turned on the red lights 
and the siren. 
 
to keep time: to operate accurately (for watches and clocks) 
This idiom is usually used with adjectives such as good and perfect. 
o 
Although this is a cheap watch, it keeps good time. 
o The old clock keeps perfect time; it's never fast or slow. 
 
LESSON 23 
 
to make do: to manage, to cope 
This idiom is used when a person must accept a substitute that is not the most 
suitable. 
o Pearl doesn't have a clean blouse so she has to make do with the one 
she wore yesterday. 
o During difficult economic times, many people have to make do with 
less. 
 
to give birth to: to bear a human being or animal 
o Jane's mother has just given birth to twin girls. 
o 
The zoo's Siberian tiger just gave birth to a baby cub. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 33 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
close call: a situation involving a narrow escape from danger (also: close 
shave) 
o Bob, that car nearly hit us! What a close call. 
o We had a close call when a small fire in our kitchen almost spread to 
the rest of the house. 
 
to get on one's nerves: to annoy or disturb (also: to bug) 
o Laura loves to talk to anyone. Sometimes her chatter really gets on my 
nerves. 
o Jack asked his neighbor to turn down the stereo because it was bugging 
him and he couldn't concentrate. 
 
to put down: to suppress, to quell (S); to criticize unfairly (S) 
o The police arrived just in time to put down the disturbance before it got 
very serious. 
o Fred tries his best at playing tennis. You shouldn't put him down like 
that. 
 
to go for: to be sold at a certain price; to seek or strive for 
o This dress probably goes for about $50, don't you think? 
o Peter was going for first place in the swim meet, but he wasn't able to 
do better than third place. 
 
to go in for: to have as an interest, such as a sport or hobby (also: to go for, 
to be into, to get into) 
o Hal goes in for tennis while his wife goes for painting and sculpture. 
o What sports are you into? I don't have any time to get into sports. 
 
to stay up: to remain awake, not to go to bed 
o I want to stay up tonight and watch a late movie on TV. 
o He stays up every night until after one o'clock, preparing his homework. 
 
to stay in: to remain at home, not to go out 
An idiom with the opposite meaning is to stay out. 
o On a rainy day, I like to stay in and read. 
o Young people are able to stay out late at night and get very little sleep. 
 
to take over: to assume control or responsibility for (S); to do or perform 
again (S) 
The meaning of the second definition is almost the same as do over in Lesson 
11. also for the second definition, a noun or pronoun must divide the idiom. 
o That large investment company specializes in taking over smaller 
businesses that are in financial trouble. 
o Most students didn't do well on the important test, so the instructor let 
them take it over. 
o Little Mickey didn't have much chance to hit the baseball during 
practice, so the coach let him take his turn over. 
 
to show up:  to appear, to arrive; to be found or located (also for the second 
definition: to turn up) 
o It really gets on my nerves that Ursula shows up late for every meeting. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 34 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Willie hopes that the watch he lost last Sunday shows up soon. 
o We've looked everywhere for that book, but it hasn't turned up yet. 
 
to clean out: to empty, to tidy by removing (S); to steal, to rob (S); to buy or 
purchase all of something (S) 
o It's time for you to clean out your closet so that you can store more 
things in there. 
o A burglar entered my apartment while I was gone and cleaned me out. 
He took over $200 in cash and jewelry. 
o Thousands of shoppers cleaned out the store that had gone bankrupt 
and was selling all its remaining products at very reduced prices. 
 
LESSON 24 
 
to knock out: to make unconscious (S); to impress or attract greatly (S) 
This idiom can be made into the noun form knockout for both definitions. 
o The prizefighter knocked out his opponent with one punch in the first 
five seconds of the first round. It was the fastest knockout in boxing 
history. 
o Linda's beautiful appearance and slender figure really knock me out. 
Isn't she a real knockout tonight? 
 
to knock one self out: to work very hard (sometimes too hard) to do 
something 
A reflexive pronoun must divided the idiom. 
o She really knocked herself out trying to pass that difficult class. 
o Don't knock yourself out during practice. Save your strength for the 
competition later. 
 
to carry out: to accomplish, to execute (S) (also: to go through with) 
o It's easy to write down a plan for losing weight, but much harder to 
carry it out. 
o Charles promised to go through with his plan to enroll in graduate 
school and get an advanced degree. 
 
to run into: to meet someone unexpectedly; to crash or collide into (also: to 
bump into) 
o It was a shock to run into an old friend from high school recently. 
o The drunk driver was slightly injured when he ran into a telephone 
pole. 
 
to set out: to start traveling toward a place (also: to set off, to heat out); to 
arrange or display neatly (also: to lay out) (S) 
o We set out for the top of the mountain at dawn. Unfortunately, as we 
set
 off, it started to snow heavily, so we decided to head out again later. 
o The children tried to set out the dishes on the table, but their dad had 
to help to lay the dishes out properly. 
 
to draw up: to create by drawing, such as a map (S); to prepare documents 
or legal papers (S) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 35 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Max asked me to draw up a map to the party so that he wouldn't get 
lost. 
o Our lawyer agreed to draw the contract up as soon as possible. 
 
give and take: compromise, cooperation between people 
o Give and take is an important element of a successful marriage. 
o Most business negotiations involve give and take between the parties 
involved. 
 
to drop out of: to stop attending; to withdraw from 
This idiom can be made into the noun form dropout. 
o Some students drop out of secondary school early in order to get jobs. 
However, such dropouts often regret their decision later in life. 
o Two more baseball teams have dropped out of the youth league due to a 
lack of players. 
 
to believe in: to accept as true, have faith in 
o Some people believe in being honest in all human affairs, while others 
accept the need to lie in order to get one's way. 
o Throughout the history of man, some cultures have believed in one god 
while others have believed in the existence of many gods. 
 
to cheer up: to make happier, to feel less sad (S) 
o We all tried to cheer up the little boy when he stared to cry. 
o After the death of Deanne's husband, it was difficult to cheer her up at 
all. 
 
to make sense: to be sensible or reasonable 
o It makes sense to wait until a sunny day to visit the park together. 
o That Jimmy ran away from home suddenly doesn't make sense to any 
of us. 
 
LESSON 25 
 
to burst out: to depart quickly (also: to storm out); to act suddenly 
For the second definition, this idiom is usually followed by a gerund form such 
as laughing, crying, singing, etc. 
o Faye and Debbie were so angry at each other that one of them burst out 
the front door of the house and the other stormed out the back door. 
o It was so funny to see a little baby in the audience burst out crying 
when the choir group burst out singing at the start of the recital. 
 
to get away: to get free, to escape 
o We always try to get away from the noise and heat of the city for a 
month or two each summer. 
o No one knows how the suspected criminal got away from the police. 
 
to get away with: to avoid punishment for 
o Jonathan tries to get away with coming late to work almost every day; 
someday he'll suffer the consequences. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 36 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Terence can't continue to put his friends down like that and expect to 
get away with it forever. 
 
to serve (someone) right: to receive one's just punishment (S) 
This idiom is usually used at the beginning of a sentence after the subject it. 
Compare the following examples with those in the previous idiom above. 
o It serves Jonathan right to be fired from his job. 
o It serves Terence right that none of his friends are willing to help him 
move to a new apartment. 
 
to keep up: to prevent from sleeping (S); to continue maintaining (speed, 
level of work, condition, etc.) (S) 
o Could you please turn down the TV volume? You're keeping up the 
children. 
o If we can keep up this speed, we should arrive there in about two hours. 
o James is so proud of his daughter for getting mostly A's in school. He's 
certain that she can keep up the good work. 
o The Federal Reserve Bank hopes to keep the value of the dollar up at 
least through the rest of the year. 
 
to keep up with: to have current knowledge of; to understand as an 
explanation 
This idiom should be compared to the meaning of to keep up with in Lesson 17. 
o Evan keeps up with world affairs by reading a new magazine each week. 
o I understand a lot of the Spanish language, but I can't keep up with the 
fast conversation in this Mexican film. 
 
to stand out: to be easily visible or noticeable (also: to stick out) 
This idiom is used for someone or something that is different from all others. 
o 
Her bright red hair makes her stand out from others in the group. 
o Brandon Styles is a tall, distinguished gentleman who sticks out in any 
crowd. 
 
to let on: to reveal or tell what you know, to hint 
o We are going to the movies tonight and we don't want Doris to go. If 
you see her, make sure not to let on. 
o They asked me not to let on to Ted that we're planning the birthday 
party; it's supposed to be a big surprise. 
 
to go wrong: to fail, to result badly 
o Something went wrong with the engine, so we had to have the car 
towed to a garage. 
o Shawn should have been here over an hour ago; I'm certain that 
something went wrong. 
 
to meet (someone) halfway: to compromise with someone 
o Steve wanted $4,500 for his car, and Gwen offered $4,000. They met 
each other halfway and agreed on $4,250. 
o After a long process of give and take, the owners of the company agreed 
to meet the workers halfway by providing some additional health 
benefits but no wage increase. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 37 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to check up on: to examine with the purpose of determining condition (also: 
to check on) 
This idiom has the related noun form checkup. 
o The government always checks up on the background of employees who 
are hired for sensitive military projects. 
o The doctor wants me to have a thorough medical checkup as part of a 
preventive medicine program. 
 
to stick up: to point or place upwards (S); to rob (S) 
o You should put some water on your hair. It's sticking up in the back. 
o A masked thief stuck up a grocery store in the neighborhood last night. 
 
LESSON 26 
 
to come about: to happen 
o I didn't find any explanation in the newspaper about how the political 
coup came about. 
o The flood came about as a result of the heavy winter rains. 
 
to bring about: to cause to happen 
This idiom is used to indicate who or what caused something to come about. 
o John brought about the accident because of his carelessness. 
o The heavy rains we have each spring bring about serious flooding. 
 
to build up: to increase slowly, to make stronger gradually (S) 
o They built up their savings account so that they could buy a new house. 
o The professional athlete exercises regularly to build her strength up. 
 
to die down: to decrease, to lessen in strength 
o The hurricane became a less serious tropical storm when its winds died 
down. 
o We let the fire in the fireplace die down and enjoyed watching the 
embers as they glowed in the dark. 
 
to fade away: to diminish gradually in time or distance 
o The memory of that unpleasant experience has slowly faded away. 
o The music of the band gradually faded away as the parade passed 
down the street. 
 
to die out: not to exist anymore; to be in the process of disappearing 
o Scientists still are not sure exactly why the dinosaurs died out. 
o That strange, new style of dancing is slowly dying out. 
 
to make out: to read or see clearly (S); to prepare a legal document, such as 
a will, a check, etc. (S) 
o The letter was so poorly handwritten that I couldn't make out many of 
the words. 
o Harold, please make the check out to Acme Piano Company. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 38 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to live up to: to fulfill (a standard or promise) 
o It was clear that the lazy student would never live up to his family's 
expectations. 
o It surprised us that the car salesperson lived up to all the promises he 
made. 
 
to stick to: to adhere to (a promise), to follow or obey (a set of rules, 
procedures, etc.) 
o He made a promise to his wife to quit smoking and drinking, and so far 
he has stuck to it. 
o All organizations expect their employees to stick to established work 
rules and procedures. 
o If you try hard to stick to your principles, then you'll be able to live up 
to them. 
 
to stick it to: to cheat, to take unfair advantage of (also: to rip off, the 
ripoff) 
o Be careful in doing business with that salesperson. He'll stick it to you 
at the first opportunity. 
o The car dealership certainly ripped me off when I bought this car. It 
has caused me trouble constantly. 
o You paid over $400 for that jacket? What a ripoff! 
 
to stand up for: to insist on, to demand; to defend, to support 
o If you don't stand up for your rights in court, the lawyers will try to 
stick it to you. 
o Frank stood up for his friend, who was being put down by other 
teenagers nearby. 
 
to cut corners: to economize, to save money 
o Most students live on limited budgets and have to cut corners 
whenever possible. 
o The Livingstons have nine children, so it is essential that they cut 
corners at all times. 
 