
LESSON 27 
 
to take on: to employ, to hire (S); to accept responsibility for, to undertake 
o That factory is taking a lot of new employees on for its new production 
line. 
o Would you be willing to take on the task of organizing the next 
company picnic? 
 
to take down: to remove from an elevated place (S); to write what is said, to 
note 
o We should take the pictures down from the wall and clean off the dust. 
o The secretary took down everything that was said at the meeting. 
 
to fall through: to fail to materialize, not to succeed 
This idiom is usually used with the noun plan or plans as the subject. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 39 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Our plan to travel to Europe last summer fell through when we were 
unable to save up enough money. 
o Felix made plans to have a party for everyone in his office, but they fell 
through at the last moment. 
 
to give in: to surrender, to stop resisting 
o Completely surrounded by our soldiers, the enemy finally gave in. 
o Management gave in to the strikers' demands and agreed to a 
shortened work week. 
 
to give off: to release, to produce, to release 
o When water boils, it gives off stream. 
o The flowers in this garden give off a strange odor. 
 
to give out: to distribute; to become exhausted or depleted (also: to run out) 
The first definition has the same meaning as the second definition of to pass 
out in Lesson 19. 
o An usher stood at the door of the theater giving out programs. 
o I couldn't finish the ten-mile race because my energy gave out. 
o Jeff plans to stay in Las Vegas and gamble until his money runs out. 
 
to have it in for: to want revenge on, to feel hostile towards (also: to hold a 
grudge against) 
o Martina expects to lose her job because her boss has had it in for her 
for a long time. 
o The teacher has held a grudge against Al ever since the time that he 
insulted her in front of the class. 
 
to have it out with: to quarrel with, to confront 
o I am going to have it out with Jack about all the times that he has told 
us lies. 
o Ben had it out with his roommate about coming back home so late and 
making a lot of noise. 
 
to hold off: to delay, or to be delayed, in occurring (S) 
This idiom has the same meaning as to put off in Lesson 5 when a noun or 
pronoun is used as an object, as in the second example. 
o If the rain holds off for a few more days, they can finish planting the 
rest of the crop. 
o The judge agreed to hold off making a decision until new evidence 
could be introduced into court. 
 
to hold out: to endure, to be sufficient; to survive by resisting; to persist in 
one's efforts 
The first definition for to hold out has the opposite meaning of the second 
definition for to give out (seventh idiom, this lesson). 
o If our supply of food and water holds out, we plan to camp here for 
another week. However, whenever it gives out, we'll have to leave. 
o That nation's troops cannot hold out much longer against the superior 
forces of the enemy. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 40 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o The valuable football player held out for more money before signing a 
new contract with his team. 
 
to hold over: to extend, to keep for a longer time (S) 
o They are going to hold over that movie for another week because so 
many people are coming to see it. 
o Let's hold discussion of this problem over until our next meeting. 
 
SECTION THREE --- ADVANCED 
 
LESSON 28 
 
to let up: to slacken, to lessen in intensity; to relax or ease one's effort (also: 
related idiom: to take it easy) 
o If the rain doesn't let up soon, we won't be able to have our picnic. 
o When Jane is working, she never lets up for a moment. 
o Jane should take it easy or she'll get exhausted. 
 
to lay off: to abstain from, stop using as a habit; to release or discharge from 
a job (also: related idiom: to let go) (S) 
o If you're trying to lose weight, you should lay off sweet things. 
o If business continues to be slow, we will have to lay off some workers. 
o It will be necessary to let the youngest employees go first. 
 
to bring out: to show or introduce (to the public) (S); to make available (S) 
o Most automobile companies bring out new models each year. 
o My mother brought some snacks out for my friends and me to have. 
 
to bring back: to return a bought or borrowed item (also: to take back) (S) 
To bring back is used when you are speaking at the place that speaking at 
another place. 
o Ma'am, our store policy is that you can bring back the dress as long as 
you have your sales receipt. 
o You can borrow my car if you promise to bring it back by six o'clock. 
o I have to take this book back to the library today. 
 
to wait up for: to wait until late at night without going to bed 
o 
Don't wait up for me. I may be back after midnight. 
o We waited up for our son until two o'clock in the morning before we 
called the police. 
 
to leave (someone or something) alone: not to disturb, to stay away 
from (S) (also: to let alone) 
o Leave the baby alone for a while and she may go to sleep. 
o After the cat had scratched Peter twice, he let it alone. 
 
let along: and certainly not (also: not to mention, to say nothing of) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 41 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
Let alone is used after negative forms. The example that follows let alone is 
much less possible than the example that precedes let alone. 
o I'm too sick today to walk to the kitchen, let alone to go to the zoo with 
you. 
o He doesn't even speak his own language well, let alone French. 
 
to break off: to terminate, to discontinue (S) 
o After war began, the two countries broke off diplomatic relations. 
o Elsa and Bob were once engaged, but they have already broken it off. 
 
to wear off: to disappear gradually 
o My headache isn't serious. It will wear off after an hour or so. 
o The effect of the painkilling drug didn't wear off for several hours. 
 
to wear down: to become worn gradually through use (also: to wear away, 
to wear through) (S) 
Compare with to wear out (to become useless from wear) in Lesson 8. 
o If you drag your feet while you walk, you'll wear down your shoes 
quickly. 
o The pounding of ocean waves against the coast gradually wears it away. 
o Johnny has worn through the seat of his pants. 
o Helga threw away that dress because she had worn it out. 
 
on the whole: in general, in most ways (also: by and large) 
o He is, on the whole
, a good student. 
o By and large, I agree with your suggestions. 
 
touch and go: risky, uncertain until the end 
o The complicated medical operation was touch and go for several hours. 
o The outcome of the soccer final was touch and go for the entire match. 
 
LESSON 29 
 
to work out: to exercise; to develop, to devise (a plan) (S) 
o Jane works out at the fitness center every other morning before going 
to school. 
o The advertising department worked out a plan to increase company 
sales. 
o We couldn't come up with a good plan for solving the problem, but we 
agree to work it out at a later date. 
 
to back up: to drive or go backwards (S); to defend, to support (S); to return 
to a previous thought 
o I couldn't back my car up because there was a bicycle in the driveway 
behind me. 
o Ursula asked her friends to back her up when she went to court to fight 
a ticket for an illegal lane change on the highway. 
o Wait a minute. Could you back up and say that again? 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 42 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to back out: to drive a vehicle out of a parking space (S); to withdraw 
support, to fail to fulfill a promise or obligation 
o The parking lot attendant had to back another car out before he could 
get to mine. 
o We were all ready to sign the contracts when one of the parties to the 
agreement backed out. 
 
to have one's heart set on: to desire greatly, to be determined to 
o She has her heart set on taking a trip abroad. She's been thinking about 
it for months. 
o Todd has his heart set on going to medical school and becoming a 
doctor. 
 
to buy up: to buy the complete stock of (S) 
o Before the hurricane struck, residents bought up all the food and water 
in local stores. 
o The government plans to buy up all surplus grain in order to stabilize 
the price. 
 
to buy out: to purchase a business or company (S); to purchase all of a 
person's chares or stock (S) 
This idiom is similar in meaning to take over in Lesson 23. 
o Larger companies often buy out smaller companies that are having 
financial difficulties. 
o Mr. Lee has been trying for come time to buy his partner out so that he 
can control the company by himself. 
 
to sell out: to sell all items (S); to arrange for the sale of a company or 
business (S) 
o That store is closing its doors for good and is selling out everything this 
weekend. 
o If my new business enterprise is successful, I'll sell it 
out for a few 
million dollars. 
 
to catch on: to become popular or widespread; to understand, to appreciate 
a joke 
This idiom is often used with the preposition to for the second definition. 
o Fashions of the past often catch on again among young people. 
o When the teacher speaks quickly like that, can you catch on easily? 
o His joke was very funny at the time, but when I told it to others later, 
nobody seemed to catch on. I had to tell the joke again before anyone 
could catch on to it. 
 
to be cut out for: to have the necessary skills or talent for 
The idiom is most often used in the negative or in questions. 
o John is certainly not cut out for the work of a trial lawyer. 
o Are you certain that you are cut out for that kind of job. 
 
to throw out: to discard (S); to remove by force (S); to refuse to consider, to 
reject (S) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 43 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Instead of throwing out our paper waste in the office, we should recycle 
it. 
o When a fight broke out between two people on the dance floor, the 
management threw them out. 
o The judge threw the case out because there was insufficient evidence to 
try the defendant successfully. 
 
to throw up: to erect or construct quickly (S); to vomit (S) 
o The Red Cross threw up temporary shelters for the homeless victims of 
the earthquake. 
o The ill patient is unable to digest her food properly, so she is throwing 
all of it up. 
 
to clear up: to make understandable (also: to straighten out) (S); to 
become sunny 
o The teacher tried to clear up our confusion about the meaning of the 
difficult paragraph in the reading. 
o It's rather cloudy this morning. Do you think that it will clear up later? 
 
LESSON 30 
 
to slow down: to go, or cause to go, more slowly (also: to slow up) (S) 
This idiom can be used both with and without an object. 
o The car was going so fast that the motorist couldn't slow it down 
enough to make the sharp curve. 
o You're eating too fast to digest your food well. Slow down! 
o Slow up a bit! You're talking so quickly that I can't catch on well. 
 
to dry up: to lose, or cause to lose, all moisture (S); to be depleted 
o Every summer the extreme heat in this valley dries the stream up. 
o All funds for the project dried up when the local government faced 
budget crisis. 
 
to dry out: to lose, or cause to lose, moisture gradually (S); to stop drinking 
alcohol in excess (also: to sober up) 
o Martha hung the towel outside on the clothesline in order to dry it out. 
o Some people go to alcohol recovery centers in order to dry out. 
 
to be up to (something): to be doing something; to be planning or plotting 
something, scheming 
The first definition usually takes the form of a question. 
o Hi, Jake. I haven't seen you in a long time. What have you been up to? 
o Those boys hiding behind the building must be up to something bad. 
 
to beat around the bush: to avoid discussing directly, to evade the issue 
o Our boss beats around the bush so much that no one in the office 
knows exactly what he wants us to do. 
o Instead of beating around the bush, Melinda explained her objection in 
very clear terms. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 44 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to come to an end: to end, to stop 
This idiom is used with finally and never when some activity lasts too long. 
o The meeting finally came to an end at ten o'clock in the evening. 
o Even though my friend seemed to enjoy the movie, I thought that it 
would never come to an end. 
 
to put an end to: to cause to end, to terminate in a definite manner (also: to 
do away with) 
o The dictatorial government put an end to organized opposition in the 
country by making it illegal to form a political party. 
o It may never be possible to do away with all forms of prejudice and 
discrimination in the world. 
 
to get even with: to seek revenge, to retaliate 
This idiom is similar in meaning to to have it in for in Lesson 27. 
o Bill has had it in for his boss for a long time. He told me he's planning 
to get even with his boss by giving some company secrets to a 
competitor. 
o I want to get even with Steve for beating me so badly in tennis last time. 
The scores were 6-1 and 6-2. 
 
to fool around: to waste time (also: to screw around); to joke, not to be 
serious 
o The teacher got angry because her students were fooling around and 
couldn't finish their work before the end of class. 
o Sometimes I wish that Pat would stop fooling around so much and talk 
about something more interesting to others. 
 
to look out on: to face, to overlook 
o We really enjoy our new apartment that looks out on a river. 
o Their rear window looks out on a lovely garden. 
 
to stir up: to cause anger (S); to create (trouble or difficulty) (
S) 
o The senseless murder of a small child stirred up the whole 
neighborhood. 
o The boss is in a bad mood today so don't stir her up with any more 
customer complaints. 
 
to take in: to visit in order to enjoy (S); to decrease the size of clothes (S); to 
deceive, to fool (S) 
o We decided to take in Toronto on our trip to Canada, and that is where 
we took in the most memorable outdoor stage play we have ever seen. 
o Lois lost so much weight that she had her skirts and slacks taken in by 
her tailor. 
o The fraudulent investment advisor took everyone in with his sincere 
manner and generous promises. Most investors lost all their money. 
 
LESSON 31 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 45 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to go through: to undergo, to experience; to consume, to use (also: to use 
up) 
The first definition is used when someone is having some hardship or 
difficulty. 
o I can't believe what she went through to get that job. She had four 
interviews with the hiring committee in one week! 
o Frank said that they had gone through all the toilet paper in the house, 
but Steve couldn't believe that they had used it all up. 
 
to go without saying: to be known without the need to mention 
This idiom occurs with a that-clause, often with the pronoun it as the subject. 
o It goes without saying that you shouldn't drive quickly in bad weather. 
o That he will gain weight if he continues to eat and drink so much goes 
without saying. 
 
to put (someone) on: to mislead by joking or tricking (S) 
This idiom is usually used in a continuous tense form. A noun object must 
divide the idiom. 
o Don't worry. I wouldn't expect you do all that work by yourself. I'm just 
putting you on. 
o Jack can't be serious about what he said. He must be putting us on. 
 
to keep one's head: to remain calm during an emergency 
o When the heater caused a fire, Gloria kept her head and phoned for 
assistance right away; otherwise, the whole house might have burned 
down. 
o When the boat starting sinking in heavy seas, the crew members kept 
their heads and led the passengers to the lifeboats. 
 
to lose one's head: not to think clearly, to lose one's self-control 
o When Mel saw a god in the street right in front of his car, he lost his 
head and drove onto the sidewalk and into a tree. 
o If the politician hadn't gotten stirred up and lost his head, he never 
would have criticized his opponent unfairly. 
 
narrow-minded: not willing to accept the ideas of others (the opposite of 
narrow minded is broad-minded) 
o Narrow-minded people tend to discriminate against groups of people 
with which they have nothing in common. 
o Ted is so broad-minded that he has almost no standards by which he 
judges others. 
 
to stand up: to withstand use or wear; to fail to appear for a date or social 
engagement (S) 
o My old car has stood up well over the years. I haven't had any major 
problems at all. 
o Janet was very angry because her new boyfriend stood her up on their 
second date. She waited over an hour for him before returning home. 
 
to get the better of: to win or defeat by gaining an advantage over someone 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 46 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Jim doesn't seem very athletic at tennis, but if you're not careful, he'll 
get the better of you. 
o Lynn gets frustrated when Bruce gets the better of her in arguments. 
No matter what she says, he always has a clever response. 
 
to break loose: to become free or loose, to escape 
o During the bad storm, the boat broke loose from the landing and 
drifted out to sea. 
o One bicyclist broke loose from the pack of racers and pulled ahead 
towards the finish line. 
 
on edge: nervous, anxious; upset, irritable 
o Cynthia was on edge all day about the important presentation she had 
to give to the local citizens group. 
o I don't like being around Jake when he's on edge like that. Someone 
should tell him to calm down and relax. 
 
to waste one's breath: not be able to convince someone 
This idiom is used when someone is wasting time trying to convince another 
person. The idiom to save one's breath is related and means not to waste 
effort trying to convince someone. 
o Don't argue with Frank any longer. You are wasting your breath trying 
to get him to agree with you. 
o I have already decided what I'm going to do. You can't change my mind, 
so save your breath. 
 
to cut short: to make shorter, to interrupt (S) 
o The moderator asked the speaker to cut short his talk because there 
wasn't much time remaining for questions from the audience. 
o We were very unfortunate when we received bad news from home that 
forced us to cut our trip short. 
 
LESSON 32 
 
to step in: to become involved or concerned with something; to enter a place 
for a brief time (also: to step into) 
o When the children started fighting on the play-ground, a teacher had to 
step in and stop the fight. 
o The supervisor asked one of the employees to step in her office for a 
moment. 
o Would you step into the hallway so that I can show you the information 
posted on the bulletin board? 
 
to step down: to retire or leave a top position, to resign 
o Next May the principal will step down after thirty-five years of service 
to the school. 
o The angry shareholders wanted the company president to step down 
because of the stock scandal. 
 
to step on: to treat severely, to discipline; to go faster, to work more quickly 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 47 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
For the second definition, the idiom is followed by the pronoun it. 
o Sometimes it's necessary to step on children when they do something 
dangerous. 
o We're going to be late for the movies. You'd better step on it! 
 
a steal: very inexpensive, a bargain 
This idiom is often used in an exclamation using what. 
o I can't believe that I paid only $2,000 for this three year-old car. What 
a steal! 
o Scott considered it a steal when he bought a complete bedroom set for 
only $99. 
 
to play up to: to behave so as to gain favor with someone 
o The other students in the class resent Jim because he plays up to the 
teacher in order to get better grades. 
o When my children asked me to go shopping for a new video game, I 
knew why they had been playing up to me all morning. 
 
more or less: approximately, almost; somewhat, to a certain degree 
o Although your bedroom feels smaller, it's more or less the same size as 
mine. 
o Ted more or less agreed with our decision to put off the meeting until 
more members could show up. At least he didn't object strongly. 
 
to screw up: to confuse, to scramble (S); to cause problems in (S) 
o Chris had trouble finding Jane's apartment because the addresses of 
the buildings screwed him up. 
o Instead of fixing the television set, the technician screwed it up even 
more. 
 
to goof up: to perform badly, to make a mistake (also: to mess up, to slip 
up) 
o I really goofed up
 on the exam today; did you mess up, too? 
o Karen slipped up when she forgot to deposit money into her checking 
account. 
 
to go off the deep end: to get very angry and do something hastily 
o Just because you had a serious argument with your supervisor, you 
didn't have to go off the deep end and resign, did you? 
o When Dan's wife demanded a divorce, he went off the deep end again. 
This time he was shouting so that the whole neighborhood could hear. 
 
to lose one's touch: to fail at what one used to do well 
o Milton used to be the best salesman at the car dealership, but recently 
he seems to have lost his touch. 
o I used to play tennis very well, but today you beat me easily. I must be 
losing my touch. 
 
in hand: under firm control, well managed 
o The copilot asked the pilot if he had the plane in hand or whether he 
needed any help navigating through the severe thunderstorm. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 48 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o The police officer radioed to the station that she had the emergency 
situation in hand and didn't require any assistance. 
 
on hand: available, nearby 
This idiom is often followed by in case. 
o I always keep some extra money on hand in case I forget to get cash 
from the bank. 
o The concert organizers arranged to have some security guards on hand 
in case there were any problems during the performance. 
 
LESSON 33 
 
to kick (something) around: to discuss informally (over a period of time) 
(S) (also: to toss around) 
o At first my friends were reluctant to consider my suggestion, but they 
finally were willing to kick it ground for a while. 
o Herb thought that we should kick around the idea of establishing a 
special fund for supporting needy members of the club. 
 
on the ball: attentive, competent, alert 
o Jim was the only one who caught that serious error in the bookkeeping 
statements. He's really on the ball. 
o Ella was certainly on the ball when she remembered to reconfirm our 
fight arrangements. All the rest of us would have forgotten. 
 
to make up: to meet or fulfill a missed obligation at a later time (S); to create, 
to invent (an idea) (S); to apply cosmetics to (S); to comprise, to be composed 
of 
Note that all of the definitions are separable except the last one. 
o The teacher allowed several students who missed the exam to make it 
up during the next class. 
o The little boy made up a bad excuse for wearing his dirty shoes in the 
house, so his mother punished him. 
o Dee was able to make her face up in half the normal time because she 
didn't use much makeup. 
o Two separate bodies --- the House of Representatives and the Senate --
- make up the Congress of the United States. 
 
to make up with: resolve differences with 
This idiom is used for differences of opinion between friends and lovers. 
o Gundula made up with her roommate after their serious 
misunderstanding about arrangements for the party. 
o After the bad quarrel the two lovers kissed and made up with each 
other. 
 
to pull together: to gather, to collect (information) (S); to gain control of 
one's emotions (S) 
A reflexive pronoun must e used for the second definition. 
o The reporter pulled together information from several sources in 
preparing the newspaper article. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 49 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Mr. Simpson was so frightened when he heard footsteps behind him on 
the lonely, dark street that it took several minutes to pull himself 
together. 
 
to be looking up: to appear promising or optimistic, to be improving 
This idiom is used in a continuous tense, very often with the subject things.  
o The board chairman is glad to report that things are looking up for the 
company after several years of declining sales. 
o Prospects for building that new library in the downtown area are 
looking up. 
 
to kick the habit: to stop a bad habit 
o Once a child becomes accustomed to chewing his nails, it's difficult kick 
the habit. 
o The doctor advised the heavy cigarette smoker that her heart had 
become damaged and that she should kick the habit right away. 
 
to cover up: to conceal, to hide (S) 
This idiom is used for events which are potentially embarrassing to one's 
reputation, as well as against the law. The noun coverup can be formed. 
o The office worker tried to cover up his crimes, but everyone knew that 
he had been stealing office supplies all along. 
o The political coverup of the bribery scandal failed and was reported by 
all the major media. 
 
to drop off: to fall asleep; to take to a certain location (S); to decrease (for 
the third definition, also: to fall off) 
o My mother dropped off during the boring television show; her head 
was nodding up and down. 
o I don't mind dropping you off at the store on my way to work. 
o Business has been dropping off rapidly recently, but fortunately it 
hasn't been falling off as quickly as for our competitors. 
 
to turn over: to place upside down (
S); to flip, to turn upside down; to pass 
or give control to someone (S) 
o the teacher asked the students to turn the answer sheet over and to 
write a short essay on the back. 
o The car was going too fast around the corner and turned over twice. 
o Mr. Collins has decided to turn over his jewelry store to his son at the 
end of the year. 
 
to go through channels: to send a request through the normal way 
This idiom can be used with the adjective proper. 
o If you go through proper channels in this company, it's sometimes 
impossible to get anything done quickly. 
o The police told the important civic leader that even she had to go 
through channels in reporting the burglary of her house. 
 
last straw: the final event in a series of unacceptable actions 
This idiom is always used with the definite article the. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 50 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o When John asked to borrow money from me for the fourth time, it was 
the last straw. I finally told him that I couldn't lend him any more. 
o I can't believe that my roommate left the door to our department 
unlocked again. It's the last straw; I'm moving out. 
 
LESSON 34 
 
to get cold feet: to become unable or afraid to do something 
This idiom is usually used in the case of an important or dangerous action. 
o Karl was supposed to marry Elaine this weekend, but at the last 
moment he got cold feet. 
o Only one of the rock climbers got cold feet when the group reached the 
base of the hundred-meter cliff. 
 
to trade in: to receive credit for the value of an old item towards the 
purchase of a new item (S) 
This idiom is used to form the noun trade-in. 
o The car dealership offered me $1,000 for my old car if I traded it in for 
a new model. 
o The appliance company was offering a $50 trade-in during the special 
promotion for its new line of refrigerators. 
 
face-to-face: direct, personal; directly, personally (written without hyphens) 
This idiom can be used both as an adjective (the first definition) and as an 
adverb (the second definition). 
o The workers' representatives had a face-to-face meeting with 
management to resolve the salary issue. 
o The stepmother and her teenage soon talked face to face about his 
troubles in school. 
 
to be with (someone): to support, to back (also: to go along with); to 
understand or follow what someone is saying 
o Although others thought that we shouldn't go along with Jerry, I told 
Jerry that I was with him on his proposal for reorganizing the staff. 
o After turning left at the traffic light, go two blocks and turn right on 
Madison. After three more blocks, turn right again. Are you still with 
me? 
 
to be with it: to be able to focus or concentrate on (also: to get with it) 
To be with it in the negative has the same meaning as to feel out of it. The 
related form to get with it is used in commands. 
o Jack's really with it today. I've never seen him play such good soccer. 
o You've done only a small amount of work in two hours. You'
re not with 
it today, are you? 
o It's no excuse to say that you feel out of it. We need everyone's help on 
this, so get with it! 
 
to fall for: to fall in love quickly; to be fooled or tricked by 
o Samantha and Derek never expected to fall for each other like they did, 
but they got married within two weeks of having met. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 51 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o The Masons wanted to believe their son, but unfortunately they had 
fallen for his lies too many times to be deceived once again. 
 
it figures: it seems likely, reasonable, or typical 
This idiom is either followed by a that-clause or by no other part of grammar. 
o It figures that the children were willing to help with the yardwork only 
if they received a rewarded for doing so. 
o When I told Evan that his secretary was unhappy about not getting a 
raise, he said that it figured. 
 
to fill (someone) in: to inform, to give background information to (also: to 
clue in) (S) 
This idiom is often followed by the preposition on and a noun phrase 
containing the pertinent information. 
o Could you fill me in on what is going to be discussed at tomorrow's 
meeting? 
o Not having been to the convention, my associate asked me to clue him 
in on the proceedings. 
 
to make (someone) tick: to motivate to behave or act in a certain way (S) 
This idiom is used within a what-clause. 
o If a salesperson knows what makes a customer tick, he will be able to 
sell a lot of merchandise. 
o It's been impossible for us to figure out what makes our new boss tick. 
One moment she seems pleasant and then the next moment she's upset. 
 
to cover for: to take someone's place temporarily, to substitute for; to 
protect someone by lying or deceiving 
o Go ahead and take your coffee break. I'll cover for you until you return. 
o The criminal made his wife cover for him when the police asked if the 
man had been home all day. She swore that he had been there. 
 
to give (someone) a break: to provide a person with another opportunity 
or chance (S); not to expect too much work from (S); not to expect someone to 
believe (S) 
Command forms are most common with this idiom. For the third definition, 
the pronoun me must be used. 
o The driver pleaded with the police officer to give him a break and not 
issue him a ticket for speeding. 
o When the students heard how much homework the teacher wanted 
them to do over the holiday, they begged, "Give us a break, Professor 
Doyle!" 
o Oh, Jim, give me a break! That's a terrible excuse for being late. 
 
to bow out: to stop doing as a regular activity, to remove oneself from a 
situation 
The related idiom to want out indicates that someone desires to bow out. 
o She bowed out as the school's registrar after sixteen years of service. 
o One of the two partners wanted out of the deal because they couldn't 
agree on the terms of the contract. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 52 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
LESSON 35 
 
to pin on: to find guilty of a crime or offense (S) (also: to hang on) 
This idiom is divided by a noun phrase containing the crime or offense. The 
accused person is mentioned after the preposition on. 
o The prosecuting attorney tried to pin the murder on the victim's 
husband, but the jury returned a verdict of "not guilty." 
o I wasn't anywhere near the window when it got broken. You can't pin 
that on me. 
 
to get a rise out of: to provoke a response from 
This idiom is usually used when someone is teased into responding in anger or 
annoyance. 
o You can kid me all day about my mistake, but you won't get a rise out 
of me. 
o I got a rise out of Marvin when I teased him about his weight. Marvin 
weighs over two-hundred pounds. 
 
to stick around: to stay or remain where one is, to wait 
This idiom is used when someone is waiting for something to happen or for 
someone to arrive 
o Todd had to stick around the house all day until the new furniture was 
finally delivered in the late afternoon. 
o Why don't you stick around for a while and see if Sarah eventually 
shows up? 
 
to pick up the tab: to pay the cost or bill 
This idiom applies when someone pays for the cost of another person's meal, 
tickets, etc. 
o The advertising manger is flying to Puerto Rico for a conference, and 
her firm is picking up the tab. 
o The government picked up the tab for the visiting dignitary. It paid for 
all of the lodging and meals, as well as transportation, during his stay. 
 
by the way: incidentally 
This idiom is used when someone thinks of something further in the course of 
a conversation. 
o Movies are my favorite form of entertainment. Oh, by the way, have 
you seen the new picture that's playing at the Bijou? 
o Vera's been divorced for three years now. She told me, by the way, that 
she never plans to remarry. 
 
to go to town: to do something with enthusiasm and thoroughness 
o Our interior decorator really went to town in remodeling our living 
room. I'm afraid to ask how much it's going to cost. 
o Charlie really went to town on his research project. He consulted over 
forty reference works and wrote a ninety-page report. 
 
to let slide: to neglect a duty (S); to ignore a situation (S) 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 53 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o Terry knew that she should have paid the electric bill on time instead of 
letting it slide. Now the utility company has turned off her service. 
o When he tried to get a rise out of me by mentioning my failure to 
receive a promotion at work, I just let it slide. 
 
search me: I don't know (also: beats me) 
This idiom is used informally, usually as a command form. 
o When Elmer asked his wife if she knew why the new neighbors left their 
garage door open all night, she responded, "Search me." 
o When I asked Dereck why his girlfriend wasn't at the party yet, he said, 
"Beats me. I expected her an hour ago." 
 
to get off one's chest: to express one's true feelings (S) 
This idiom is used when someone has long waited to express themselves. 
o Ellen felt a lot better when she finally talked to a counselor and got the 
problem off her chest. 
o Faye hasn't shared her concern about her marriage with her husband 
yet. I think that she should get it off her chest soon. 
 
to live it up: to spend money freely, to live luxuriously 
o Kyle and Eric saved up money for two years so that they could travel to 
Europe and live it up. 
o After receiving a large inheritance from a rich aunt, I was able to live it 
up for years. 
 
to liven up: to energize, to make more active (also: to pick up) 
o The teacher occasionally took the class on field trips just to liven things 
up a bit. 
o The animals in the zoo began to liven up when evening came and the 
temperatures dropped. 
o Many people have to drink coffee every morning just to pick
 themselves 
up. 
 
to have a voice in: to share involvement in 
o The new vice-president was promised that she would have a voice in 
developing the company's international expansion. 
o The students are trying to have a voice in college affairs by gaining 
representation on administrative committees. 
 
LESSON 36 
 
to check in: to register at a hotel or motel; to leave or deposit for 
transporting or safekeeping (S) 
The adjective form check-in derives from this idiom. 
o Courtney arrived in town at mid-day and promptly checked in at the 
Plaza Hotel. The hotel permitted an early check-in time. 
o There dozens of people at the airline counters waiting to check their 
bags in for their flights. 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 54 - 



ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
to check out: to pay the bill at a hotel or motel and then leave; to investigate, 
to examine (S) 
The adjective form check-out derives from this idiom. 
o The latest you should check out of the hotel is 12 noon. However, in 
your case, we can set a special check-out time of 2:00 P.M. 
o The police received a call from someone claiming to have witnessed a 
murder. The police sent two detectives to check the call out right away. 
 
to take at one's word: to accept what one says as true, to believe 
o When he offered to be responsible for the fund raiser, I took him at his 
word. Now he's saying that he's not available to do it. 
o You should be careful about taking her at her word. She's been known 
to say one thing but to do another. 
 
to serve (the/one's) purpose: to be useful, to suit one's needs or 
requirements 
o I don't have a screwdriver to open this, but I think that a knife will 
serve the purpose. 
o Jane prefers working to studying, so it served her purpose to drop out 
of school and take that job. 
 
in the worst way: very much, greatly 
o Jim and Claudia want to have children in the worst way. They are 
trying very hard to conceive. 
o Because Umer ahs relatives in Turkey, he wants to visit there in the 
worst way. 
 
to cop out: to avoid one's responsibility, to quit 
This idiom is an informal version of the second definition to back out (lesson 
29). The noun form copout means an excuse for avoiding responsibility. 
o Evelyn had agreed to help us with arrangements for the party, but she 
copped out at the last minute. 
o I can't believe that Cindy offered such an explanation for failing to show 
up. What a poor copout! 
 
to line up: to form a line; to arrange to have, to manage to obtain (S) 
o The moviegoers lined up in front of the theater showing the most 
popular film of the summer. 
o Rob is going to schedule the famous author to speak at the convention 
if he can line her up in time. 
 
to lose one's cool: to get excited, angry, or flustered 
o Despite the boos from some in the audience, the actors on stage never 
lost their cool. 
o Although the group of skiers were in danger form an apparent 
avalanche, their ski guide never lost his cool. 
 
to leave open: to delay making a decision on (S) 
o In making up the job announcement, the firm decided to leave the 
salary open until a qualified candidate was found. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 55 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o We know that the annual summer camp will be held in August, but let's 
leave the exact dates open for now. 
 
to turn on: to interest greatly, to excite (S) 
The idiom with the opposite meaning is to turn off. These idioms are used to 
form the nouns turnon and turnoff. 
o Does great art turn you on? I find going to a museum and viewing 
classic works of art a real turnon. 
o Going to a bar and having silly conversation with strangers really turns 
me off. In fact, most bar scenes are really turnoffs to me. 
 
to miss the boat: to lose an opportunity, to fail in some undertaking 
o The precious metals market was looking up several months ago, but 
unfortunately most investors missed the boat. 
o Mr. Vlasic's new business went bankrupt within a short time. He really 
missed the boat by opening a tanning salon near the beach. 
 
to think up: to invent, to create (also: to dream up) 
This idiom is often used for an unusual or foolish thought. 
o Who thought up the idea of painting the living room walls bright red? 
o When asked by the teacher why she was late, the student dreamed up a 
plausible excuse. 
 
LESSON 37 
 
to throw (someone) a curve: to introduce an unexpected topic, causing 
embarrassment (S) 
o The first week of class was going very well until a student threw the 
teacher a curve by suggesting that the textbook was too difficult. 
o The director asked us in advance to stick to the meeting agenda and not 
to throw him any curves. 
 
to make waves: to create a disturbance, usually by complaining 
This idiom is similar in meaning to the previous idiom, but the emphasis is on 
the aspect of complaining rather than causing embarrassment. 
o In most companies, an employee who makes waves is not appreciated. 
o The meeting was going smoothly until one of the participants made 
waves about the newly revised compensation package. 
 
to carry on: to continue as before; to conduct, to engage in; to behave in an 
immature manner 
o Even in the face of disaster, the inhabitants carried on as though 
nothing had happened. 
o The business associates decided to carry on their discussion in the 
hotel bar instead of the conference room. 
o I can't believe that John carried on so much just because his dog died. 
He looked depressed and cried for weeks after it happened. 
 
not on your life: absolutely not (also: no way) 
This idiom is used as a kind of exclamation by itself. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 56 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o You're asking me to invest in that poorly rated company just because 
you know the son of the president? Not on your life! 
o When a friend tried to get Mark to jump out of a plane with a parachute, 
he immediately responded, "No way!" 
 
to cover ground: to be extensive, to discuss much material 
Forms such as a lot of, too much, too little are used before the noun ground. 
o That national commission's report on urban ghettos covers a lot of 
ground. Many of the recommendations are too costly to implement. 
o In his first lecture on Greek philosophers, I thought that our professor 
covered too little ground. 
 
to mind the store: to be responsible for an office while others are gone 
o It seems that all of our employees are taking a lunch break at the same 
time. I wonder who's minding the store. 
o Lynne agreed to mind the store while the others went outside to watch 
the parade passing by. 
 
to throw the book at: to punish with full penalty, to be harsh on 
o Because the criminal was a repeat offender, the judge threw the book at 
him with heavy fines and a long prison term. 
o My boss threw the book at me when he discovered that I had been 
using company time for personal business. I was severely reprimanded 
and forced to make up the lost time. 
 
to put one's foot in: to say or do the wrong thing 
This idiom is used with the noun phrase one's mouth or the pronoun it. 
o Fred really put his foot in his mouth when he called his supervisor by 
the wrong name. 
o I really put my foot in it when I forgot my girlfriend's birthday and 
didn't buy her anything. She almost lost her cool. 
 
to be up for grabs: to become available to others 
this idiom is used when something is highly desirable to many other people. 
o When one of the full-time contract instructors stepped down, her nice 
office overlooking the river was up for grabs. 
o Did you know that Senator Stone is retiring and that her Senate seat is 
up for grabs? 
 
to show off: to display one's ability in order to attract attention (S); to let 
others see, to expose to public view (S) 
This idiom can form the noun showoff for the first definition. 
o Elizabeth is an excellent swimmer, but I don't like the way she shows 
off in front of everyone. It's very obvious that she enjoys being a 
showoff. 
o Jacquie showed her large wedding ring off to all her friends. 
 
to learn the ropes: to become familiar with routine procedures at work or 
school 
o The job applicant didn't have much previous experience or knowledge, 
but she seemed intelligent enough to learn the ropes quickly. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 57 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
o It took the new schoolteacher a year to learn the ropes regarding 
administrative and curricular matters. 
 
to keep one's fingers crossed: to hope to have good results, to hope that 
nothing bad will happen 
This idiom reflects the way people cross their fingers to hope for good luck. 
o Let's keep our fingers crossed that we got passing grades on that 
college entrance exam. 
o Jerry kept his fingers crossed that the good weather would hold up for 
the picnic he was planning for the coming weekend. 
 
LESSON 38 
 
to land on one's feet: to recover safely form an unpleasant or dangerous 
situation 
o After a series of personal and professional difficulties, it's amazing that 
George has landed on his feet so quickly. 
o Some young adults get into so much trouble at school that they are 
never able to land on their feet again. They drop out before graduating. 
 
to dish out: to distribute in large quantity (S); to speak of others in a critical 
manner (S) 
o Mary's mom dished out two or three scoops of ice cream for each child 
at the birthday party. 
o Larry can't seem to take any criticism of his actions but he certainly 
likes to dish it out. 
 
to get through to: to communicate with, to make someone understand (also: 
to break through to) 
This idiom has the meaning of to make someone "catch on" (Lesson 29, eighth 
idiom, the first definition) 
o Some of the students in my reading class understand English so poorly 
that it is difficult to get through to them. 
o The doctors have never succeeded in breaking though to Mr. Ames, 
who is a silent and secretive patient. 
 
to keep one's word: to fulfill a promise, to be responsible 
An idiom with the opposite meaning is to break one's word. 
o Suzanne kept her word to me not to let on to others that I intend to 
step down next month. 
o Thomas always intends to keep his word, but invariably the end result 
is that he breaks his word. He just isn't capable of being a responsible 
person. 
 
to be over one's head: to be very busy, to have too much to do (also: to be 
up to one's ears); to be beyond one's ability to understand 
o I'd love to take a week off for a hiking trip, but at the moment I am over 
my head in work. Maybe next week when I'm only up to my ears! 
o It was impossible for the tutor to get through to Bill about the physics 
problem because the subject matter was over Bill's head. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 58 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to ask for: to deserve, to receive a just punishment (also: to bring upon) 
o If you drink alcohol and then drive a car, you're only asking for trouble. 
o Don't complain about your cut in salary. You asked for it by refusing to 
heed our repeated warnings not to be late and inefficient. 
 
to be a far cry from: to be very different from 
o I enjoyed visiting Seattle, but it was a far cry from the ideal vacation 
spot I expected. 
o Ned is enjoying his new job, but his responsibilities are a far cry from 
what he was told they would be. 
 
by all means: certainly, definitely, naturally (also: of course); using any 
possible way or method 
o If the Johnsons invite us for dinner, then by all means we have to 
return the invitation. Of cause, we don't have to invite their children, 
too. 
o In order to ensure its survival, the ailing company has to obtain an 
infusion of cash by all means. 
 
to get out from under: to restore one's financial security, to resolve a 
difficult financial obligation 
o After years of struggling to get ahead, the young couple finally got out 
from under their debts. 
o The ailing company, succeeding in obtaining the necessary cash, was 
able to get out from under its financial burdens. 
 
to take the bull by the horns: to handle a difficult situation with 
determination 
This idiom is usually used when someone has been postponing an action for 
some time and finally wants or needs to resolve it. 
o After three years of faithful service, Jake decided to take the bull by the 
horns and ask his boss for a raise. 
o Vic has been engaged to Laura for a long time now, and I know that he 
loves her. He should take the bull by the horns and ask her to marry 
him. 
 
to give (someone) a hand
: to assist, to aid, to help (also: to lend 
someone a hand) (S) 
o Would you give me a hand lifting this heavy box? 
o When Terry's car broke down at night on the highway, no one would 
stop to lend her a hand. 
 
to give (someone) a big hand: to clap one's hands in applause, to applaud 
(S) 
o After the talented new vocalist had sung her number, the audience 
gave her a big hand. 
o Should we give a big hand to each beauty contestant is as she is 
introduced, or should we wait until all the introductions are finished? 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 59 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
LESSON 39 
 
to goof off: to waste time, to be idle 
o Some of the workers in our office always goof off when the boss is out. 
o 
On Saturday afternoons, I like to go to a movie or just goof off at home. 
 
to talk back to: to answer in a rude manner, to speak to disrespectfully 
o Billy, if you talk back to me like that once more, you're going to spend 
the rest of the day in your room. 
o The school principal had to reprimand the child for talking back to her 
teacher. 
 
to be in: to be popular or fashionable; to be available at one's work or home 
o Most young people tend to want anything that is in at the time, but a 
few don't care about current trends. 
o Could you please tell me when Mrs. Zachary will be in? I'd like to talk to 
her soon. 
 
to be out: to be unpopular or no longer in fashion; to be away from one's 
work or home 
o These days, designer jeans are in and long skirts are out. 
o I'm sorry, Mr. Jensen is out at the moment. Could I take a message? 
 
to draw the line at: to determine to be unacceptable, to refuse to consider 
o I don't mind helping him with his homework, but I draw the line at 
writing a term paper for him. 
o The conference organizers tried to accommodate the needs of the 
various interest groups, but they drew the line at extending the 
conference by two day. 
 
to get out of line: to disobey or ignore normal procedures or rules (also: to 
step out of line) 
o When a child gets out of line in that teacher's class, she uses the old-
fashioned method of making the child sit in the corner of the room. 
o Any employee who steps out of line by coming to work in an 
unacceptable condition will be fired. 
 
dry run: rehearsal, practice session 
o The college president requested a dry run of the graduation ceremony 
in order to ensure that all aspects went smoothly. 
o Before the manager present the reorganizational plans to the board of 
directors, he did several dry runs of his presentation. 
 
to play by ear: to play music that one has heard but never read (S); to 
proceed without plan, to do spontaneously (S) 
The pronoun it is often used with the second definition. 
o That pianist can play most popular music by ear. She never needs to 
read sheet music. 
o My husband wanted to plan our trip carefully, but I argued that it was 
more fun if we played it by ear. 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 60 - 

ESSENTIAL IDIOMS IN ENGLISH by ROBERT J. DIXSON  
 
to be in (someone's) shoes: to be in another person's position, to face the 
same situation as another person 
o If I were in your shoes, I wouldn't take too many classes this semester. 
o When his boss finds out about that accounting error, I wouldn't want to 
be in his shoes. 
 
to keep after: to remind constantly, to nag 
o Lynn always has to keep after her children about cleaning up their 
rooms and doing chores around the house. 
o Lon is so forgetful that it's necessary to keep after him about every little 
thing. 
 
to fix up: to repair or put back in good condition (S); to arrange a date or an 
engagement for another person (S) 
o Instead of buying an expensive new home, we decided to buy an older 
home and fix it up ourselves. 
o Since my visiting friend didn't have a date for dinner, I fixed her up 
with a male friend of mine. They got along very well together. 
 
to be had: to be victimized or cheated 
o When the jeweler confirmed that the diamonds that the woman had 
purchased abroad were really fake, she exclaimed, "I've been had!" 
o The angry customer complained about being overcharged at the store, 
asserting that this was the third time that he had been had. 
 
 
PRENTICE HALL REGENTS Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey 07632 - 61 - 